§ 17. In the first book we considered the idea merely as such, that is,
only according to its general form. It is true that as far as the abstract
idea, the concept, is concerned, we obtained a knowledge of it in respect
of its content also, because it has content and meaning only in relation
to the idea of perception, without which it would be worthless and empty.
Accordingly, directing our attention exclusively to the idea of
perception, we shall now endeavour to arrive at a knowledge of its
content, its more exact definition, and the forms which it presents to us.
And it will specially interest us to find an explanation of its peculiar
significance, that significance which is otherwise merely felt, but on
account of which it is that these pictures do not pass by us entirely
strange and meaningless, as they must otherwise do, but speak to us
directly, are understood, and obtain an interest which concerns our whole
nature.

We direct our attention to mathematics, natural science, and philosophy,
for each of these holds out the hope that it will afford us a part of the
explanation we desire. Now, taking philosophy first, we find that it is
like a monster with many heads, each of which speaks a different language.
They are not, indeed, all at variance on the point we are here
considering, the significance of the idea of perception. For, with the
exception of the Sceptics and the Idealists, the others, for the most
part, speak very much in the same way of an object which constitutes the
basis of the idea, and which is indeed different in its whole being and
nature from the idea, but yet is in all points as like it as one egg is to
another. But this does not help us, for we are quite unable to distinguish
such an object from the idea; we find that they are one and the same; for
every object always and for ever presupposes a subject, and therefore
remains idea, so that we recognised objectivity as belonging to the most
universal form of the idea, which is the division into subject and object.
Further, the principle of sufficient reason, which is referred to in
support of this doctrine, is for us merely the form of the idea, the
orderly combination of one idea with another, but not the combination of
the whole finite or infinite series of ideas with something which is not
idea at all, and which cannot therefore be presented in perception. Of the
Sceptics and Idealists we spoke above, in examining the controversy about
the reality of the outer world.

If we turn to mathematics to look for the fuller knowledge we desire of
the idea of perception, which we have, as yet, only understood generally,
merely in its form, we find that mathematics only treats of these ideas so
far as they fill time and space, that is, so far as they are quantities.
It will tell us with the greatest accuracy the how-many and the how-much;
but as this is always merely relative, that is to say, merely a comparison
of one idea with others, and a comparison only in the one respect of
quantity, this also is not the information we are principally in search
of.

Lastly, if we turn to the wide province of natural science, which is
divided into many fields, we may, in the first place, make a general
division of it into two parts. It is either the description of forms,
which I call Morphology, or the explanation of changes, which I call
Etiology. The first treats of the permanent forms, the second of the
changing matter, according to the laws of its transition from one form to
another. The first is the whole extent of what is generally called natural
history. It teaches us, especially in the sciences of botany and zoology,
the various permanent, organised, and therefore definitely determined
forms in the constant change of individuals; and these forms constitute a
great part of the content of the idea of perception. In natural history
they are classified, separated, united, arranged according to natural and
artificial systems, and brought under concepts which make a general view
and knowledge of the whole of them possible. Further, an infinitely fine
analogy both in the whole and in the parts of these forms, and running
through them all (unité de plan), is established, and thus they may be
compared to innumerable variations on a theme which is not given. The
passage of matter into these forms, that is to say, the origin of
individuals, is not a special part of natural science, for every
individual springs from its like by generation, which is everywhere
equally mysterious, and has as yet evaded definite knowledge. The little
that is known on the subject finds its place in physiology, which belongs
to that part of natural science I have called etiology. Mineralogy also,
especially where it becomes geology, inclines towards etiology, though it
principally belongs to morphology. Etiology proper comprehends all those
branches of natural science in which the chief concern is the knowledge of
cause and effect. The sciences teach how, according to an invariable rule,
one condition of matter is necessarily followed by a certain other
condition; how one change necessarily conditions and brings about a
certain other change; this sort of teaching is called explanation. The
principal sciences in this department are mechanics, physics, chemistry,
and physiology.

If, however, we surrender ourselves to its teaching, we soon become
convinced that etiology cannot afford us the information we chiefly
desire, any more than morphology. The latter presents to us innumerable
and infinitely varied forms, which are yet related by an unmistakable
family likeness. These are for us ideas, and when only treated in this
way, they remain always strange to us, and stand before us like
hieroglyphics which we do not understand. Etiology, on the other hand,
teaches us that, according to the law of cause and effect, this particular
condition of matter brings about that other particular condition, and thus
it has explained it and performed its part. However, it really does
nothing more than indicate the orderly arrangement according to which the
states of matter appear in space and time, and teach in all cases what
phenomenon must necessarily appear at a particular time in a particular
place. It thus determines the position of phenomena in time and space,
according to a law whose special content is derived from experience, but
whose universal form and necessity is yet known to us independently of
experience. But it affords us absolutely no information about the inner
nature of any one of these phenomena: this is called a force of nature,
and it lies outside the province of causal explanation, which calls the
constant uniformity with which manifestations of such a force appear
whenever their known conditions are present, a law of nature. But this
law of nature, these conditions, and this appearance in a particular place
at a particular time, are all that it knows or ever can know. The force
itself which manifests itself, the inner nature of the phenomena which
appear in accordance with these laws, remains always a secret to it,
something entirely strange and unknown in the case of the simplest as well
as of the most complex phenomena. For although as yet etiology has most
completely achieved its aim in mechanics, and least completely in
physiology, still the force on account of which a stone falls to the
ground or one body repels another is, in its inner nature, not less
strange and mysterious than that which produces the movements and the
growth of an animal. The science of mechanics presupposes matter, weight,
impenetrability, the possibility of communicating motion by impact,
inertia and so forth as ultimate facts, calls them forces of nature, and
their necessary and orderly appearance under certain conditions a law of
nature. Only after this does its explanation begin, and it consists in
indicating truly and with mathematical exactness, how, where and when each
force manifests itself, and in referring every phenomenon which presents
itself to the operation of one of these forces. Physics, chemistry, and
physiology proceed in the same way in their province, only they presuppose
more and accomplish less. Consequently the most complete etiological
explanation of the whole of nature can never be more than an enumeration
of forces which cannot be explained, and a reliable statement of the rule
according to which phenomena appear in time and space, succeed, and make
way for each other. But the inner nature of the forces which thus appear
remains unexplained by such an explanation, which must confine itself to
phenomena and their arrangement, because the law which it follows does not
extend further. In this respect it may be compared to a section of a piece
of marble which shows many veins beside each other, but does not allow us
to trace the course of the veins from the interior of the marble to its
surface. Or, if I may use an absurd but more striking comparison, the
philosophical investigator must always have the same feeling towards the
complete etiology of the whole of nature, as a man who, without knowing
how, has been brought into a company quite unknown to him, each member of
which in turn presents another to him as his friend and cousin, and
therefore as quite well known, and yet the man himself, while at each
introduction he expresses himself gratified, has always the question on
his lips: “But how the deuce do I stand to the whole company?”

Thus we see that, with regard to those phenomena which we know only as our
ideas, etiology can never give us the desired information that shall carry
us beyond this point. For, after all its explanations, they still remain
quite strange to us, as mere ideas whose significance we do not
understand. The causal connection merely gives us the rule and the
relative order of their appearance in space and time, but affords us no
further knowledge of that which so appears. Moreover, the law of causality
itself has only validity for ideas, for objects of a definite class, and
it has meaning only in so far as it presupposes them. Thus, like these
objects themselves, it always exists only in relation to a subject, that
is, conditionally; and so it is known just as well if we start from the
subject, i.e., a priori, as if we start from the object, i.e., a
posteriori. Kant indeed has taught us this.

But what now impels us to inquiry is just that we are not satisfied with
knowing that we have ideas, that they are such and such, and that they are
connected according to certain laws, the general expression of which is
the principle of sufficient reason. We wish to know the significance of
these ideas; we ask whether this world is merely idea; in which case it
would pass by us like an empty dream or a baseless vision, not worth our
notice; or whether it is also something else, something more than idea,
and if so, what. Thus much is certain, that this something we seek for
must be completely and in its whole nature different from the idea; that
the forms and laws of the idea must therefore be completely foreign to it;
further, that we cannot arrive at it from the idea under the guidance of
the laws which merely combine objects, ideas, among themselves, and which
are the forms of the principle of sufficient reason.

Thus we see already that we can never arrive at the real nature of things
from without. However much we investigate, we can never reach anything but
images and names. We are like a man who goes round a castle seeking in
vain for an entrance, and sometimes sketching the façades. And yet this is
the method that has been followed by all philosophers before me.

§ 18. In fact, the meaning for which we seek of that world which is
present to us only as our idea, or the transition from the world as mere
idea of the knowing subject to whatever it may be besides this, would
never be found if the investigator himself were nothing more than the pure
knowing subject (a winged cherub without a body). But he is himself rooted
in that world; he finds himself in it as an individual, that is to say,
his knowledge, which is the necessary supporter of the whole world as
idea, is yet always given through the medium of a body, whose affections
are, as we have shown, the starting-point for the understanding in the
perception of that world. His body is, for the pure knowing subject, an
idea like every other idea, an object among objects. Its movements and
actions are so far known to him in precisely the same way as the changes
of all other perceived objects, and would be just as strange and
incomprehensible to him if their meaning were not explained for him in an
entirely different way. Otherwise he would see his actions follow upon
given motives with the constancy of a law of nature, just as the changes
of other objects follow upon causes, stimuli, or motives. But he would not
understand the influence of the motives any more than the connection
between every other effect which he sees and its cause. He would then call
the inner nature of these manifestations and actions of his body which he
did not understand a force, a quality, or a character, as he pleased, but
he would have no further insight into it. But all this is not the case;
indeed the answer to the riddle is given to the subject of knowledge who
appears as an individual, and the answer is will. This and this alone
gives him the key to his own existence, reveals to him the significance,
shows him the inner mechanism of his being, of his action, of his
movements. The body is given in two entirely different ways to the subject
of knowledge, who becomes an individual only through his identity with it.
It is given as an idea in intelligent perception, as an object among
objects and subject to the laws of objects. And it is also given in quite
a different way as that which is immediately known to every one, and is
signified by the word will. Every true act of his will is also at once
and without exception a movement of his body. The act of will and the
movement of the body are not two different things objectively known, which
the bond of causality unites; they do not stand in the relation of cause
and effect; they are one and the same, but they are given in entirely
different ways,—immediately, and again in perception for the
understanding. The action of the body is nothing but the act of the will
objectified, i.e., passed into perception. It will appear later that
this is true of every movement of the body, not merely those which follow
upon motives, but also involuntary movements which follow upon mere
stimuli, and, indeed, that the whole body is nothing but objectified will,
i.e., will become idea. All this will be proved and made quite clear in
the course of this work. In one respect, therefore, I shall call the body
the objectivity of will; as in the previous book, and in the essay on
the principle of sufficient reason, in accordance with the one-sided point
of view intentionally adopted there (that of the idea), I called it the
immediate object. Thus in a certain sense we may also say that will is
the knowledge a priori of the body, and the body is the knowledge a
posteriori of the will. Resolutions of the will which relate to the
future are merely deliberations of the reason about what we shall will at
a particular time, not real acts of will. Only the carrying out of the
resolve stamps it as will, for till then it is never more than an
intention that may be changed, and that exists only in the reason in
abstracto. It is only in reflection that to will and to act are
different; in reality they are one. Every true, genuine, immediate act of
will is also, at once and immediately, a visible act of the body. And,
corresponding to this, every impression upon the body is also, on the
other hand, at once and immediately an impression upon the will. As such
it is called pain when it is opposed to the will; gratification or
pleasure when it is in accordance with it. The degrees of both are widely
different. It is quite wrong, however, to call pain and pleasure ideas,
for they are by no means ideas, but immediate affections of the will in
its manifestation, the body; compulsory, instantaneous willing or
not-willing of the impression which the body sustains. There are only a
few impressions of the body which do not touch the will, and it is through
these alone that the body is an immediate object of knowledge, for, as
perceived by the understanding, it is already an indirect object like all
others. These impressions are, therefore, to be treated directly as mere
ideas, and excepted from what has been said. The impressions we refer to
are the affections of the purely objective senses of sight, hearing, and
touch, though only so far as these organs are affected in the way which is
specially peculiar to their specific nature. This affection of them is so
excessively weak an excitement of the heightened and specifically modified
sensibility of these parts that it does not affect the will, but only
furnishes the understanding with the data out of which the perception
arises, undisturbed by any excitement of the will. But every stronger or
different kind of affection of these organs of sense is painful, that is
to say, against the will, and thus they also belong to its objectivity.
Weakness of the nerves shows itself in this, that the impressions which
have only such a degree of strength as would usually be sufficient to make
them data for the understanding reach the higher degree at which they
influence the will, that is to say, give pain or pleasure, though more
often pain, which is, however, to some extent deadened and inarticulate,
so that not only particular tones and strong light are painful to us, but
there ensues a generally unhealthy and hypochondriacal disposition which
is not distinctly understood. The identity of the body and the will shows
itself further, among other ways, in the circumstance that every vehement
and excessive movement of the will, i.e., every emotion, agitates the
body and its inner constitution directly, and disturbs the course of its
vital functions. This is shown in detail in “Will in Nature,” p. 27 of the
second edition and p. 28 of the third.

Lastly, the knowledge which I have of my will, though it is immediate,
cannot be separated from that which I have of my body. I know my will, not
as a whole, not as a unity, not completely, according to its nature, but I
know it only in its particular acts, and therefore in time, which is the
form of the phenomenal aspect of my body, as of every object. Therefore
the body is a condition of the knowledge of my will. Thus, I cannot really
imagine this will apart from my body. In the essay on the principle of
sufficient reason, the will, or rather the subject of willing, is treated
as a special class of ideas or objects. But even there we saw this object
become one with the subject; that is, we saw it cease to be an object. We
there called this union the miracle κατ᾽ εξοχην, and the whole of the
present work is to a certain extent an explanation of this. So far as I
know my will specially as object, I know it as body. But then I am again
at the first class of ideas laid down in that essay, i.e., real objects.
As we proceed we shall see always more clearly that these ideas of the
first class obtain their explanation and solution from those of the fourth
class given in the essay, which could no longer be properly opposed to the
subject as object, and that, therefore, we must learn to understand the
inner nature of the law of causality which is valid in the first class,
and of all that happens in accordance with it from the law of motivation
which governs the fourth class.

The identity of the will and the body, of which we have now given a
cursory explanation, can only be proved in the manner we have adopted
here. We have proved this identity for the first time, and shall do so
more and more fully in the course of this work. By “proved” we mean raised
from the immediate consciousness, from knowledge in the concrete to
abstract knowledge of the reason, or carried over into abstract knowledge.
On the other hand, from its very nature it can never be demonstrated, that
is, deduced as indirect knowledge from some other more direct knowledge,
just because it is itself the most direct knowledge; and if we do not
apprehend it and stick to it as such, we shall expect in vain to receive
it again in some indirect way as derivative knowledge. It is knowledge of
quite a special kind, whose truth cannot therefore properly be brought
under any of the four rubrics under which I have classified all truth in
the essay on the principle of sufficient reason, § 29, the logical, the
empirical, the metaphysical, and the metalogical, for it is not, like all
these, the relation of an abstract idea to another idea, or to the
necessary form of perceptive or of abstract ideation, but it is the
relation of a judgment to the connection which an idea of perception, the
body, has to that which is not an idea at all, but something toto genere
different, will. I should like therefore to distinguish this from all
other truth, and call it κατ᾽ εξοχην philosophical truth. We can turn
the expression of this truth in different ways and say: My body and my
will are one;—or, What as an idea of perception I call my body, I call my
will, so far as I am conscious of it in an entirely different way which
cannot be compared to any other;—or, My body is the objectivity of my
will;—or, My body considered apart from the fact that it is my idea is
still my will, and so forth.(27)

§ 19. In the first book we were reluctantly driven to explain the human
body as merely idea of the subject which knows it, like all the other
objects of this world of perception. But it has now become clear that what
enables us consciously to distinguish our own body from all other objects
which in other respects are precisely the same, is that our body appears
in consciousness in quite another way toto genere different from idea,
and this we denote by the word will; and that it is just this double
knowledge which we have of our own body that affords us information about
it, about its action and movement following on motives, and also about
what it experiences by means of external impressions; in a word, about
what it is, not as idea, but as more than idea; that is to say, what it is
in itself. None of this information have we got directly with regard to
the nature, action, and experience of other real objects.

It is just because of this special relation to one body that the knowing
subject is an individual. For regarded apart from this relation, his body
is for him only an idea like all other ideas. But the relation through
which the knowing subject is an individual, is just on that account a
relation which subsists only between him and one particular idea of all
those which he has. Therefore he is conscious of this one idea, not
merely as an idea, but in quite a different way as a will. If, however, he
abstracts from that special relation, from that twofold and completely
heterogeneous knowledge of what is one and the same, then that one, the
body, is an idea like all other ideas. Therefore, in order to understand
the matter, the individual who knows must either assume that what
distinguishes that one idea from others is merely the fact that his
knowledge stands in this double relation to it alone; that insight in two
ways at the same time is open to him only in the case of this one object
of perception, and that this is to be explained not by the difference of
this object from all others, but only by the difference between the
relation of his knowledge to this one object, and its relation to all
other objects. Or else he must assume that this object is essentially
different from all others; that it alone of all objects is at once both
will and idea, while the rest are only ideas, i.e., only phantoms. Thus
he must assume that his body is the only real individual in the world,
i.e., the only phenomenon of will and the only immediate object of the
subject. That other objects, considered merely as ideas, are like his
body, that is, like it, fill space (which itself can only be present as
idea), and also, like it, are causally active in space, is indeed
demonstrably certain from the law of causality which is a priori valid
for ideas, and which admits of no effect without a cause; but apart from
the fact that we can only reason from an effect to a cause generally, and
not to a similar cause, we are still in the sphere of mere ideas, in which
alone the law of causality is valid, and beyond which it can never take
us. But whether the objects known to the individual only as ideas are yet,
like his own body, manifestations of a will, is, as was said in the First
Book, the proper meaning of the question as to the reality of the external
world. To deny this is theoretical egoism, which on that account regards
all phenomena that are outside its own will as phantoms, just as in a
practical reference exactly the same thing is done by practical egoism.
For in it a man regards and treats himself alone as a person, and all
other persons as mere phantoms. Theoretical egoism can never be
demonstrably refuted, yet in philosophy it has never been used otherwise
than as a sceptical sophism, i.e., a pretence. As a serious conviction,
on the other hand, it could only be found in a madhouse, and as such it
stands in need of a cure rather than a refutation. We do not therefore
combat it any further in this regard, but treat it as merely the last
stronghold of scepticism, which is always polemical. Thus our knowledge,
which is always bound to individuality and is limited by this
circumstance, brings with it the necessity that each of us can only be
one, while, on the other hand, each of us can know all; and it is this
limitation that creates the need for philosophy. We therefore who, for
this very reason, are striving to extend the limits of our knowledge
through philosophy, will treat this sceptical argument of theoretical
egoism which meets us, as an army would treat a small frontier fortress.
The fortress cannot indeed be taken, but the garrison can never sally
forth from it, and therefore we pass it by without danger, and are not
afraid to have it in our rear.

The double knowledge which each of us has of the nature and activity of
his own body, and which is given in two completely different ways, has now
been clearly brought out. We shall accordingly make further use of it as a
key to the nature of every phenomenon in nature, and shall judge of all
objects which are not our own bodies, and are consequently not given to
our consciousness in a double way but only as ideas, according to the
analogy of our own bodies, and shall therefore assume that as in one
aspect they are idea, just like our bodies, and in this respect are
analogous to them, so in another aspect, what remains of objects when we
set aside their existence as idea of the subject, must in its inner nature
be the same as that in us which we call will. For what other kind of
existence or reality should we attribute to the rest of the material
world? Whence should we take the elements out of which we construct such a
world? Besides will and idea nothing is known to us or thinkable. If we
wish to attribute the greatest known reality to the material world which
exists immediately only in our idea, we give it the reality which our own
body has for each of us; for that is the most real thing for every one.
But if we now analyse the reality of this body and its actions, beyond the
fact that it is idea, we find nothing in it except the will; with this its
reality is exhausted. Therefore we can nowhere find another kind of
reality which we can attribute to the material world. Thus if we hold that
the material world is something more than merely our idea, we must say
that besides being idea, that is, in itself and according to its inmost
nature, it is that which we find immediately in ourselves as will. I say
according to its inmost nature; but we must first come to know more
accurately this real nature of the will, in order that we may be able to
distinguish from it what does not belong to itself, but to its
manifestation, which has many grades. Such, for example, is the
circumstance of its being accompanied by knowledge, and the determination
by motives which is conditioned by this knowledge. As we shall see farther
on, this does not belong to the real nature of will, but merely to its
distinct manifestation as an animal or a human being. If, therefore, I
say,—the force which attracts a stone to the earth is according to its
nature, in itself, and apart from all idea, will, I shall not be supposed
to express in this proposition the insane opinion that the stone moves
itself in accordance with a known motive, merely because this is the way
in which will appears in man.(28) We shall now proceed more clearly and in
detail to prove, establish, and develop to its full extent what as yet has
only been provisionally and generally explained.(29)

§ 20. As we have said, the will proclaims itself primarily in the
voluntary movements of our own body, as the inmost nature of this body, as
that which it is besides being object of perception, idea. For these
voluntary movements are nothing else than the visible aspect of the
individual acts of will, with which they are directly coincident and
identical, and only distinguished through the form of knowledge into which
they have passed, and in which alone they can be known, the form of idea.

But these acts of will have always a ground or reason outside themselves
in motives. Yet these motives never determine more than what I will at
this time, in this place, and under these circumstances, not that
I will in general, or what I will in general, that is, the maxims which
characterise my volition generally. Therefore the inner nature of my
volition cannot be explained from these motives; but they merely determine
its manifestation at a given point of time: they are merely the occasion
of my will showing itself; but the will itself lies outside the province
of the law of motivation, which determines nothing but its appearance at
each point of time. It is only under the presupposition of my empirical
character that the motive is a sufficient ground of explanation of my
action. But if I abstract from my character, and then ask, why, in
general, I will this and not that, no answer is possible, because it is
only the manifestation of the will that is subject to the principle of
sufficient reason, and not the will itself, which in this respect is to be
called groundless. At this point I presuppose Kant’s doctrine of the
empirical and intelligible character, and also my own treatment of the
subject in “The Fundamental Problems of Ethics,” pp. 48, 58, and 178, et
seq., of first edition (p. 174, et seq., of second edition). I shall
also have to speak more fully on the question in the Fourth Book. For the
present, I have only to draw attention to this, that the fact of one
manifestation being established through another, as here the deed through
the motive, does not at all conflict with the fact that its real nature is
will, which itself has no ground; for as the principle of sufficient
reason in all its aspects is only the form of knowledge, its validity
extends only to the idea, to the phenomena, to the visibility of the will,
but not to the will itself, which becomes visible.

If now every action of my body is the manifestation of an act of will in
which my will itself in general, and as a whole, thus my character,
expresses itself under given motives, manifestation of the will must be
the inevitable condition and presupposition of every action. For the fact
of its manifestation cannot depend upon something which does not exist
directly and only through it, which consequently is for it merely
accidental, and through which its manifestation itself would be merely
accidental. Now that condition is just the whole body itself. Thus the
body itself must be manifestation of the will, and it must be related to
my will as a whole, that is, to my intelligible character, whose
phenomenal appearance in time is my empirical character, as the particular
action of the body is related to the particular act of the will. The whole
body, then, must be simply my will become visible, must be my will itself,
so far as this is object of perception, an idea of the first class. It has
already been advanced in confirmation of this that every impression upon
my body also affects my will at once and immediately, and in this respect
is called pain or pleasure, or, in its lower degrees, agreeable or
disagreeable sensation; and also, conversely, that every violent movement
of the will, every emotion or passion, convulses the body and disturbs the
course of its functions. Indeed we can also give an etiological account,
though a very incomplete one, of the origin of my body, and a somewhat
better account of its development and conservation, and this is the
substance of physiology. But physiology merely explains its theme in
precisely the same way as motives explain action. Thus the physiological
explanation of the functions of the body detracts just as little from the
philosophical truth that the whole existence of this body and the sum
total of its functions are merely the objectification of that will which
appears in its outward actions in accordance with a motive, as the
establishment of the individual action through the motive and the
necessary sequence of the action from the motive conflicts with the fact
that action in general, and according to its nature, is only the
manifestation of a will which itself has no ground. If, however,
physiology tries to refer even these outward actions, the immediate
voluntary movements, to causes in the organism,—for example, if it
explains the movement of the muscles as resulting from the presence of
fluids (“like the contraction of a cord when it is wet,” says Reil in his
“Archiv für Physiologie,” vol. vi. p. 153), even supposing it really could
give a thorough explanation of this kind, yet this would never invalidate
the immediately certain truth that every voluntary motion (functiones
animales) is the manifestation of an act of will. Now, just as little can
the physiological explanation of vegetative life (functiones naturales
vitales), however far it may advance, ever invalidate the truth that the
whole animal life which thus develops itself is the manifestation of will.
In general, then, as we have shown above, no etiological explanation can
ever give us more than the necessarily determined position in time and
space of a particular manifestation, its necessary appearance there,
according to a fixed law; but the inner nature of everything that appears
in this way remains wholly inexplicable, and is presupposed by every
etiological explanation, and merely indicated by the names, force, or law
of nature, or, if we are speaking of action, character or will. Thus,
although every particular action, under the presupposition of the definite
character, necessarily follows from the given motive, and although growth,
the process of nourishment, and all the changes of the animal body take
place according to necessarily acting causes (stimuli), yet the whole
series of actions, and consequently every individual act, and also its
condition, the whole body itself which accomplishes it, and therefore also
the process through which and in which it exists, are nothing but the
manifestation of the will, the becoming visible, the objectification of
the will. Upon this rests the perfect suitableness of the human and
animal body to the human and animal will in general, resembling, though
far surpassing, the correspondence between an instrument made for a
purpose and the will of the maker, and on this account appearing as
design, i.e., the teleological explanation of the body. The parts of the
body must, therefore, completely correspond to the principal desires
through which the will manifests itself; they must be the visible
expression of these desires. Teeth, throat, and bowels are objectified
hunger; the organs of generation are objectified sexual desire; the
grasping hand, the hurrying feet, correspond to the more indirect desires
of the will which they express. As the human form generally corresponds to
the human will generally, so the individual bodily structure corresponds
to the individually modified will, the character of the individual, and
therefore it is throughout and in all its parts characteristic and full of
expression. It is very remarkable that Parmenides already gave expression
to this in the following verses, quoted by Aristotle (Metaph. iii. 5):—


    Ὁς γαρ ἑκαστος εχει κρασιν μελεων πολυκαμπτων
    Τως νοος ανθρωποισι παρεστηκεν; το γαρ αυτο
    Εστιν, ὁπερ φρονεει, μελεων φυσις ανθρωποισι
    Και πασιν και παντι; το γαρ πλεον εστι νοημα.


(Ut enim cuique complexio membrorum flexibilium se habet, ita mens
hominibus adest: idem namque est, quod sapit, membrorum natura hominibus,
et omnibus et omni: quod enim plus est, intelligentia est.)(30)

§ 21. Whoever has now gained from all these expositions a knowledge in
abstracto, and therefore clear and certain, of what every one knows
directly in concreto, i.e., as feeling, a knowledge that his will is
the real inner nature of his phenomenal being, which manifests itself to
him as idea, both in his actions and in their permanent substratum, his
body, and that his will is that which is most immediate in his
consciousness, though it has not as such completely passed into the form
of idea in which object and subject stand over against each other, but
makes itself known to him in a direct manner, in which he does not quite
clearly distinguish subject and object, yet is not known as a whole to the
individual himself, but only in its particular acts,—whoever, I say, has
with me gained this conviction will find that of itself it affords him the
key to the knowledge of the inmost being of the whole of nature; for he
now transfers it to all those phenomena which are not given to him, like
his own phenomenal existence, both in direct and indirect knowledge, but
only in the latter, thus merely one-sidedly as idea alone. He will
recognise this will of which we are speaking not only in those phenomenal
existences which exactly resemble his own, in men and animals as their
inmost nature, but the course of reflection will lead him to recognise the
force which germinates and vegetates in the plant, and indeed the force
through which the crystal is formed, that by which the magnet turns to the
north pole, the force whose shock he experiences from the contact of two
different kinds of metals, the force which appears in the elective
affinities of matter as repulsion and attraction, decomposition and
combination, and, lastly, even gravitation, which acts so powerfully
throughout matter, draws the stone to the earth and the earth to the
sun,—all these, I say, he will recognise as different only in their
phenomenal existence, but in their inner nature as identical, as that
which is directly known to him so intimately and so much better than
anything else, and which in its most distinct manifestation is called
will. It is this application of reflection alone that prevents us from
remaining any longer at the phenomenon, and leads us to the thing in
itself. Phenomenal existence is idea and nothing more. All idea, of
whatever kind it may be, all object, is phenomenal existence, but the
will alone is a thing in itself. As such, it is throughout not idea,
but toto genere different from it; it is that of which all idea, all
object, is the phenomenal appearance, the visibility, the objectification.
It is the inmost nature, the kernel, of every particular thing, and also
of the whole. It appears in every blind force of nature and also in the
preconsidered action of man; and the great difference between these two is
merely in the degree of the manifestation, not in the nature of what
manifests itself.

§ 22. Now, if we are to think as an object this thing-in-itself (we wish
to retain the Kantian expression as a standing formula), which, as such,
is never object, because all object is its mere manifestation, and
therefore cannot be it itself, we must borrow for it the name and concept
of an object, of something in some way objectively given, consequently of
one of its own manifestations. But in order to serve as a clue for the
understanding, this can be no other than the most complete of all its
manifestations, i.e., the most distinct, the most developed, and
directly enlightened by knowledge. Now this is the human will. It is,
however, well to observe that here, at any rate, we only make use of a
denominatio a potiori, through which, therefore, the concept of will
receives a greater extension than it has hitherto had. Knowledge of the
identical in different phenomena, and of difference in similar phenomena,
is, as Plato so often remarks, a sine qua non of philosophy. But
hitherto it was not recognised that every kind of active and operating
force in nature is essentially identical with will, and therefore the
multifarious kinds of phenomena were not seen to be merely different
species of the same genus, but were treated as heterogeneous. Consequently
there could be no word to denote the concept of this genus. I therefore
name the genus after its most important species, the direct knowledge of
which lies nearer to us and guides us to the indirect knowledge of all
other species. But whoever is incapable of carrying out the required
extension of the concept will remain involved in a permanent
misunderstanding. For by the word will he understands only that species
of it which has hitherto been exclusively denoted by it, the will which is
guided by knowledge, and whose manifestation follows only upon motives,
and indeed merely abstract motives, and thus takes place under the
guidance of the reason. This, we have said, is only the most prominent
example of the manifestation of will. We must now distinctly separate in
thought the inmost essence of this manifestation which is known to us
directly, and then transfer it to all the weaker, less distinct
manifestations of the same nature, and thus we shall accomplish the
desired extension of the concept of will. From another point of view I
should be equally misunderstood by any one who should think that it is all
the same in the end whether we denote this inner nature of all phenomena
by the word will or by any other. This would be the case if the
thing-in-itself were something whose existence we merely inferred, and
thus knew indirectly and only in the abstract. Then, indeed, we might call
it what we pleased; the name would stand merely as the symbol of an
unknown quantity. But the word will, which, like a magic spell,
discloses to us the inmost being of everything in nature, is by no means
an unknown quantity, something arrived at only by inference, but is fully
and immediately comprehended, and is so familiar to us that we know and
understand what will is far better than anything else whatever. The
concept of will has hitherto commonly been subordinated to that of force,
but I reverse the matter entirely, and desire that every force in nature
should be thought as will. It must not be supposed that this is mere
verbal quibbling or of no consequence; rather, it is of the greatest
significance and importance. For at the foundation of the concept of
force, as of all other concepts, there ultimately lies the knowledge in
sense-perception of the objective world, that is to say, the phenomenon,
the idea; and the concept is constructed out of this. It is an abstraction
from the province in which cause and effect reign, i.e., from ideas of
perception, and means just the causal nature of causes at the point at
which this causal nature is no further etiologically explicable, but is
the necessary presupposition of all etiological explanation. The concept
will, on the other hand, is of all possible concepts the only one which
has its source not in the phenomenal, not in the mere idea of
perception, but comes from within, and proceeds from the most immediate
consciousness of each of us, in which each of us knows his own
individuality, according to its nature, immediately, apart from all form,
even that of subject and object, and which at the same time is this
individuality, for here the subject and the object of knowledge are one.
If, therefore, we refer the concept of force to that of will, we have
in fact referred the less known to what is infinitely better known;
indeed, to the one thing that is really immediately and fully known to us,
and have very greatly extended our knowledge. If, on the contrary, we
subsume the concept of will under that of force, as has hitherto always
been done, we renounce the only immediate knowledge which we have of the
inner nature of the world, for we allow it to disappear in a concept which
is abstracted from the phenomenal, and with which we can therefore never
go beyond the phenomenal.

§ 23. The will as a thing in itself is quite different from its
phenomenal appearance, and entirely free from all the forms of the
phenomenal, into which it first passes when it manifests itself, and which
therefore only concern its objectivity, and are foreign to the will
itself. Even the most universal form of all idea, that of being object for
a subject, does not concern it; still less the forms which are subordinate
to this and which collectively have their common expression in the
principle of sufficient reason, to which we know that time and space
belong, and consequently multiplicity also, which exists and is possible
only through these. In this last regard I shall call time and space the
principium individuationis, borrowing an expression from the old
schoolmen, and I beg to draw attention to this, once for all. For it is
only through the medium of time and space that what is one and the same,
both according to its nature and to its concept, yet appears as different,
as a multiplicity of co-existent and successive phenomena. Thus time and
space are the principium individuationis, the subject of so many
subtleties and disputes among the schoolmen, which may be found collected
in Suarez (Disp. 5, Sect. 3). According to what has been said, the will as
a thing-in-itself lies outside the province of the principle of sufficient
reason in all its forms, and is consequently completely groundless,
although all its manifestations are entirely subordinated to the principle
of sufficient reason. Further, it is free from all multiplicity,
although its manifestations in time and space are innumerable. It is
itself one, though not in the sense in which an object is one, for the
unity of an object can only be known in opposition to a possible
multiplicity; nor yet in the sense in which a concept is one, for the
unity of a concept originates only in abstraction from a multiplicity; but
it is one as that which lies outside time and space, the principium
individuationis, i.e., the possibility of multiplicity. Only when all
this has become quite clear to us through the subsequent examination of
the phenomena and different manifestations of the will, shall we fully
understand the meaning of the Kantian doctrine that time, space and
causality do not belong to the thing-in-itself, but are only forms of
knowing.

The uncaused nature of will has been actually recognised, where it
manifests itself most distinctly, as the will of man, and this has been
called free, independent. But on account of the uncaused nature of the
will itself, the necessity to which its manifestation is everywhere
subjected has been overlooked, and actions are treated as free, which they
are not. For every individual action follows with strict necessity from
the effect of the motive upon the character. All necessity is, as we have
already said, the relation of the consequent to the reason, and nothing
more. The principle of sufficient reason is the universal form of all
phenomena, and man in his action must be subordinated to it like every
other phenomenon. But because in self-consciousness the will is known
directly and in itself, in this consciousness lies also the consciousness
of freedom. The fact is, however, overlooked that the individual, the
person, is not will as a thing-in-itself, but is a phenomenon of will,
is already determined as such, and has come under the form of the
phenomenal, the principle of sufficient reason. Hence arises the strange
fact that every one believes himself a priori to be perfectly free, even
in his individual actions, and thinks that at every moment he can commence
another manner of life, which just means that he can become another
person. But a posteriori, through experience, he finds to his
astonishment that he is not free, but subjected to necessity; that in
spite of all his resolutions and reflections he does not change his
conduct, and that from the beginning of his life to the end of it, he must
carry out the very character which he himself condemns, and as it were
play the part he has undertaken to the end. I cannot pursue this subject
further at present, for it belongs, as ethical, to another part of this
work. In the meantime, I only wish to point out here that the phenomenon
of the will which in itself is uncaused, is yet as such subordinated to
the law of necessity, that is, the principle of sufficient reason, so that
in the necessity with which the phenomena of nature follow each other, we
may find nothing to hinder us from recognising in them the manifestations
of will.

Only those changes which have no other ground than a motive, i.e., an
idea, have hitherto been regarded as manifestations of will. Therefore in
nature a will has only been attributed to man, or at the most to animals;
for knowledge, the idea, is of course, as I have said elsewhere, the true
and exclusive characteristic of animal life. But that the will is also
active where no knowledge guides it, we see at once in the instinct and
the mechanical skill of animals.(31) That they have ideas and knowledge is
here not to the point, for the end towards which they strive as definitely
as if it were a known motive, is yet entirely unknown to them. Therefore
in such cases their action takes place without motive, is not guided by
the idea, and shows us first and most distinctly how the will may be
active entirely without knowledge. The bird of a year old has no idea of
the eggs for which it builds a nest; the young spider has no idea of the
prey for which it spins a web; nor has the ant-lion any idea of the ants
for which he digs a trench for the first time. The larva of the
stag-beetle makes the hole in the wood, in which it is to await its
metamorphosis, twice as big if it is going to be a male beetle as if it is
going to be a female, so that if it is a male there may be room for the
horns, of which, however, it has no idea. In such actions of these
creatures the will is clearly operative as in their other actions, but it
is in blind activity, which is indeed accompanied by knowledge but not
guided by it. If now we have once gained insight into the fact, that idea
as motive is not a necessary and essential condition of the activity of
the will, we shall more easily recognise the activity of will where it is
less apparent. For example, we shall see that the house of the snail is no
more made by a will which is foreign to the snail itself, than the house
which we build is produced through another will than our own; but we shall
recognise in both houses the work of a will which objectifies itself in
both the phenomena—a will which works in us according to motives, but in
the snail still blindly as formative impulse directed outwards. In us also
the same will is in many ways only blindly active: in all the functions of
our body which are not guided by knowledge, in all its vital and
vegetative processes, digestion, circulation, secretion, growth,
reproduction. Not only the actions of the body, but the whole body itself
is, as we have shown above, phenomenon of the will, objectified will,
concrete will. All that goes on in it must therefore proceed through will,
although here this will is not guided by knowledge, but acts blindly
according to causes, which in this case are called stimuli.

I call a cause, in the narrowest sense of the word, that state of
matter, which, while it introduces another state with necessity, yet
suffers just as great a change itself as that which it causes; which is
expressed in the rule, “action and reaction are equal.” Further, in the
case of what is properly speaking a cause, the effect increases directly
in proportion to the cause, and therefore also the reaction. So that, if
once the mode of operation be known, the degree of the effect may be
measured and calculated from the degree of the intensity of the cause; and
conversely the degree of the intensity of the cause may be calculated from
the degree of the effect. Such causes, properly so called, operate in all
the phenomena of mechanics, chemistry, and so forth; in short, in all the
changes of unorganised bodies. On the other hand, I call a stimulus,
such a cause as sustains no reaction proportional to its effect, and the
intensity of which does not vary directly in proportion to the intensity
of its effect, so that the effect cannot be measured by it. On the
contrary, a small increase of the stimulus may cause a very great increase
of the effect, or conversely, it may eliminate the previous effect
altogether, and so forth. All effects upon organised bodies as such are of
this kind. All properly organic and vegetative changes of the animal body
must therefore be referred to stimuli, not to mere causes. But the
stimulus, like every cause and motive generally, never determines more
than the point of time and space at which the manifestation of every force
is to take place, and does not determine the inner nature of the force
itself which is manifested. This inner nature we know, from our previous
investigation, is will, to which therefore we ascribe both the unconscious
and the conscious changes of the body. The stimulus holds the mean, forms
the transition between the motive, which is causality accompanied
throughout by knowledge, and the cause in the narrowest sense. In
particular cases it is sometimes nearer a motive, sometimes nearer a
cause, but yet it can always be distinguished from both. Thus, for
example, the rising of the sap in a plant follows upon stimuli, and cannot
be explained from mere causes, according to the laws of hydraulics or
capillary attraction; yet it is certainly assisted by these, and
altogether approaches very near to a purely causal change. On the other
hand, the movements of the Hedysarum gyrans and the Mimosa pudica,
although still following upon mere stimuli, are yet very like movements
which follow upon motives, and seem almost to wish to make the transition.
The contraction of the pupils of the eyes as the light is increased is due
to stimuli, but it passes into movement which is due to motive; for it
takes place, because too strong lights would affect the retina painfully,
and to avoid this we contract the pupils. The occasion of an erection is a
motive, because it is an idea, yet it operates with the necessity of a
stimulus, i.e., it cannot be resisted, but we must put the idea away in
order to make it cease to affect us. This is also the case with disgusting
things, which excite the desire to vomit. Thus we have treated the
instinct of animals as an actual link, of quite a distinct kind, between
movement following upon stimuli, and action following upon a known motive.
Now we might be asked to regard breathing as another link of this kind. It
has been disputed whether it belongs to the voluntary or the involuntary
movements, that is to say, whether it follows upon motive or stimulus, and
perhaps it may be explained as something which is between the two.
Marshall Hall (“On the Diseases of the Nervous System,” § 293 sq.)
explains it as a mixed function, for it is partly under the influence of
the cerebral (voluntary), and partly under that of the spinal
(non-voluntary) nerves. However, we are finally obliged to number it with
the expressions of will which result from motives. For other motives,
i.e., mere ideas, can determine the will to check it or accelerate it,
and, as is the case with every other voluntary action, it seems to us that
we could give up breathing altogether and voluntarily suffocate. And in
fact we could do so if any other motive influenced the will sufficiently
strongly to overcome the pressing desire for air. According to some
accounts Diogenes actually put an end to his life in this way (Diog.
Laert. VI. 76). Certain negroes also are said to have done this (F. B.
Osiander “On Suicide” [1813] pp. 170-180). If this be true, it affords us
a good example of the influence of abstract motives, i.e., of the
victory of distinctively rational over merely animal will. For, that
breathing is at least partially conditioned by cerebral activity is shown
by the fact that the primary cause of death from prussic acid is that it
paralyses the brain, and so, indirectly, restricts the breathing; but if
the breathing be artificially maintained till the stupefaction of the
brain has passed away, death will not ensue. We may also observe in
passing that breathing affords us the most obvious example of the fact
that motives act with just as much necessity as stimuli, or as causes in
the narrowest sense of the word, and their operation can only be
neutralised by antagonistic motives, as action is neutralised by
re-action. For, in the case of breathing, the illusion that we can stop
when we like is much weaker than in the case of other movements which
follow upon motives; because in breathing the motive is very powerful,
very near to us, and its satisfaction is very easy, for the muscles which
accomplish it are never tired, nothing, as a rule, obstructs it, and the
whole process is supported by the most inveterate habit of the individual.
And yet all motives act with the same necessity. The knowledge that
necessity is common to movements following upon motives, and those
following upon stimuli, makes it easier for us to understand that that
also which takes place in our bodily organism in accordance with stimuli
and in obedience to law, is yet, according to its inner nature—will, which
in all its manifestations, though never in itself, is subordinated to the
principle of sufficient reason, that is, to necessity.(32) Accordingly, we
shall not rest contented with recognising that animals, both in their
actions and also in their whole existence, bodily structure and
organisation, are manifestations of will; but we shall extend to plants
also this immediate knowledge of the essential nature of things which is
given to us alone. Now all the movements of plants follow upon stimuli;
for the absence of knowledge, and the movement following upon motives
which is conditioned by knowledge, constitutes the only essential
difference between animals and plants. Therefore, what appears for the
idea as plant life, as mere vegetation, as blindly impelling force, we
shall claim, according to its inner nature, for will, and recognise it as
just that which constitutes the basis of our own phenomenal being, as it
expresses itself in our actions, and also in the whole existence of our
body itself.

It only remains for us to take the final step, the extension of our way of
looking at things to all those forces which act in nature in accordance
with universal, unchangeable laws, in conformity with which the movements
of all those bodies take place, which are wholly without organs, and have
therefore no susceptibility for stimuli, and have no knowledge, which is
the necessary condition of motives. Thus we must also apply the key to the
understanding of the inner nature of things, which the immediate knowledge
of our own existence alone can give us, to those phenomena of the
unorganised world which are most remote from us. And if we consider them
attentively, if we observe the strong and unceasing impulse with which the
waters hurry to the ocean, the persistency with which the magnet turns
ever to the north pole, the readiness with which iron flies to the magnet,
the eagerness with which the electric poles seek to be re-united, and
which, just like human desire, is increased by obstacles; if we see the
crystal quickly and suddenly take form with such wonderful regularity of
construction, which is clearly only a perfectly definite and accurately
determined impulse in different directions, seized and retained by
crystallisation; if we observe the choice with which bodies repel and
attract each other, combine and separate, when they are set free in a
fluid state, and emancipated from the bonds of rigidness; lastly, if we
feel directly how a burden which hampers our body by its gravitation
towards the earth, unceasingly presses and strains upon it in pursuit of
its one tendency; if we observe all this, I say, it will require no great
effort of the imagination to recognise, even at so great a distance, our
own nature. That which in us pursues its ends by the light of knowledge;
but here, in the weakest of its manifestations, only strives blindly and
dumbly in a one-sided and unchangeable manner, must yet in both cases come
under the name of will, as it is everywhere one and the same—just as the
first dim light of dawn must share the name of sunlight with the rays of
the full mid-day. For the name will denotes that which is the inner
nature of everything in the world, and the one kernel of every phenomenon.

Yet the remoteness, and indeed the appearance of absolute difference
between the phenomena of unorganised nature and the will which we know as
the inner reality of our own being, arises chiefly from the contrast
between the completely determined conformity to law of the one species of
phenomena, and the apparently unfettered freedom of the other. For in man,
individuality makes itself powerfully felt. Every one has a character of
his own; and therefore the same motive has not the same influence over
all, and a thousand circumstances which exist in the wide sphere of the
knowledge of the individual, but are unknown to others, modify its effect.
Therefore action cannot be predetermined from the motive alone, for the
other factor is wanting, the accurate acquaintance with the individual
character, and with the knowledge which accompanies it. On the other hand,
the phenomena of the forces of nature illustrate the opposite extreme.
They act according to universal laws, without variation, without
individuality in accordance with openly manifest circumstances, subject to
the most exact predetermination; and the same force of nature appears in
its million phenomena in precisely the same way. In order to explain this
point and prove the identity of the one indivisible will in all its
different phenomena, in the weakest as in the strongest, we must first of
all consider the relation of the will as thing-in-itself to its phenomena,
that is, the relation of the world as will to the world as idea; for this
will open to us the best way to a more thorough investigation of the whole
subject we are considering in this second book.(33)

§ 24. We have learnt from the great Kant that time, space, and causality,
with their entire constitution, and the possibility of all their forms,
are present in our consciousness quite independently of the objects which
appear in them, and which constitute their content; or, in other words,
they can be arrived at just as well if we start from the subject as if we
start from the object. Therefore, with equal accuracy, we may call them
either forms of intuition or perception of the subject, or qualities of
the object as object (with Kant, phenomenon), i.e., idea. We may
also regard these forms as the irreducible boundary between object and
subject. All objects must therefore exist in them, yet the subject,
independently of the phenomenal object, possesses and surveys them
completely. But if the objects appearing in these forms are not to be
empty phantoms, but are to have a meaning, they must refer to something,
must be the expression of something which is not, like themselves, object,
idea, a merely relative existence for a subject, but which exists without
such dependence upon something which stands over against it as a condition
of its being, and independent of the forms of such a thing, i.e., is
not idea, but a thing-in-itself. Consequently it may at least be asked:
Are these ideas, these objects, something more than or apart from the fact
that they are ideas, objects of the subject? And what would they be in
this sense? What is that other side of them which is toto genere
different from idea? What is the thing-in-itself? The will, we have
answered, but for the present I set that answer aside.

Whatever the thing-in-itself may be, Kant is right in his conclusion that
time, space, and causality (which we afterwards found to be forms of the
principle of sufficient reason, the general expression of the forms of the
phenomenon) are not its properties, but come to it only after, and so far
as, it has become idea. That is, they belong only to its phenomenal
existence, not to itself. For since the subject fully understands and
constructs them out of itself, independently of all object, they must be
dependent upon existence as idea as such, not upon that which becomes
idea. They must be the form of the idea as such; but not qualities of that
which has assumed this form. They must be already given with the mere
antithesis of subject and object (not as concepts but as facts), and
consequently they must be only the more exact determination of the form of
knowledge in general, whose most universal determination is that
antithesis itself. Now, that in the phenomenon, in the object, which is in
its turn conditioned by time, space and causality, inasmuch as it can only
become idea by means of them, namely multiplicity, through co-existence
and succession, change and permanence through the law of causality,
matter which can only become idea under the presupposition of causality,
and lastly, all that becomes idea only by means of these,—all this, I say,
as a whole, does not in reality belong to that which appears, to that
which has passed into the form of idea, but belongs merely to this form
itself. And conversely, that in the phenomenon which is not conditioned
through time, space and causality, and which cannot be referred to them,
nor explained in accordance with them, is precisely that in which the
thing manifested, the thing-in-itself, directly reveals itself. It follows
from this that the most complete capacity for being known, that is to say,
the greatest clearness, distinctness, and susceptibility of exhaustive
explanation, will necessarily belong to that which pertains to knowledge
as such, and thus to the form of knowledge; but not to that which in
itself is not idea, not object, but which has become knowledge only
through entering these forms; in other words, has become idea, object.
Thus only that which depends entirely upon being an object of knowledge,
upon existing as idea in general and as such (not upon that which
becomes known, and has only become idea), which therefore belongs
without distinction to everything that is known, and which, on that
account, is found just as well if we start from the subject as if we start
from the object,—this alone can afford us without reserve a sufficient,
exhaustive knowledge, a knowledge which is clear to the very foundation.
But this consists of nothing but those forms of all phenomena of which we
are conscious a priori, and which may be generally expressed as the
principle of sufficient reason. Now, the forms of this principle which
occur in knowledge of perception (with which alone we are here concerned)
are time, space, and causality. The whole of pure mathematics and pure
natural science a priori is based entirely upon these. Therefore it is
only in these sciences that knowledge finds no obscurity, does not rest
upon what is incomprehensible (groundless, i.e., will), upon what cannot
be further deduced. It is on this account that Kant wanted, as we have
said, to apply the name science specially and even exclusively to these
branches of knowledge together with logic. But, on the other hand, these
branches of knowledge show us nothing more than mere connections,
relations of one idea to another, form devoid of all content. All content
which they receive, every phenomenon which fills these forms, contains
something which is no longer completely knowable in its whole nature,
something which can no longer be entirely explained through something
else, something then which is groundless, through which consequently the
knowledge loses its evidence and ceases to be completely lucid. This that
withholds itself from investigation, however, is the thing-in-itself, is
that which is essentially not idea, not object of knowledge, but has only
become knowable by entering that form. The form is originally foreign to
it, and the thing-in-itself can never become entirely one with it, can
never be referred to mere form, and, since this form is the principle of
sufficient reason, can never be completely explained. If therefore all
mathematics affords us an exhaustive knowledge of that which in the
phenomena is quantity, position, number, in a word, spatial and temporal
relations; if all etiology gives us a complete account of the regular
conditions under which phenomena, with all their determinations, appear in
time and space, but, with it all, teaches us nothing more than why in each
case this particular phenomenon must appear just at this time here, and at
this place now; it is clear that with their assistance we can never
penetrate to the inner nature of things. There always remains something
which no explanation can venture to attack, but which it always
presupposes; the forces of nature, the definite mode of operation of
things, the quality and character of every phenomenon, that which is
without ground, that which does not depend upon the form of the
phenomenal, the principle of sufficient reason, but is something to which
this form in itself is foreign, something which has yet entered this form,
and now appears according to its law, a law, however, which only
determines the appearance, not that which appears, only the how, not the
what, only the form, not the content. Mechanics, physics, and chemistry
teach the rules and laws according to which the forces of impenetrability,
gravitation, rigidity, fluidity, cohesion, elasticity, heat, light,
affinity, magnetism, electricity, &c., operate; that is to say, the law,
the rule which these forces observe whenever they enter time and space.
But do what we will, the forces themselves remain qualitates occultæ.
For it is just the thing-in-itself, which, because it is manifested,
exhibits these phenomena, which are entirely different from itself. In its
manifestation, indeed, it is completely subordinated to the principle of
sufficient reason as the form of the idea, but it can never itself be
referred to this form, and therefore cannot be fully explained
etiologically, can never be completely fathomed. It is certainly perfectly
comprehensible so far as it has assumed that form, that is, so far as it
is phenomenon, but its inner nature is not in the least explained by the
fact that it can thus be comprehended. Therefore the more necessity any
knowledge carries with it, the more there is in it of that which cannot be
otherwise thought or presented in perception—as, for example,
space-relations—the clearer and more sufficing then it is, the less pure
objective content it has, or the less reality, properly so called, is
given in it. And conversely, the more there is in it which must be
conceived as mere chance, and the more it impresses us as given merely
empirically, the more proper objectivity and true reality is there in such
knowledge, and at the same time, the more that is inexplicable, that is,
that cannot be deduced from anything else.

It is true that at all times an etiology, unmindful of its real aim, has
striven to reduce all organised life to chemism or electricity; all
chemism, that is to say quality, again to mechanism (action determined by
the shape of the atom), this again sometimes to the object of phoronomy,
i.e., the combination of time and space, which makes motion possible,
sometimes to the object of mere geometry, i.e., position in space (much
in the same way as we rightly deduce the diminution of an effect from the
square of the distance, and the theory of the lever in a purely
geometrical manner): geometry may finally be reduced to arithmetic, which,
on account of its one dimension, is of all the forms of the principle of
sufficient reason, the most intelligible, comprehensible, and completely
susceptible of investigation. As instances of the method generally
indicated here, we may refer to the atoms of Democritus, the vortex of
Descartes, the mechanical physics of Lesage, which towards the end of last
century tried to explain both chemical affinities and gravitation
mechanically by impact and pressure, as may be seen in detail in “Lucrèce
Neutonien;” Reil’s form and combination as the cause of animal life, also
tends in this direction. Finally, the crude materialism which even now in
the middle of the nineteenth century has been served up again under the
ignorant delusion that it is original, belongs distinctly to this class.
It stupidly denies vital force, and first of all tries to explain the
phenomena of life from physical and chemical forces, and those again from
the mechanical effects of the matter, position, form, and motion of
imagined atoms, and thus seeks to reduce all the forces of nature to
action and reaction as its thing-in-itself. According to this teaching,
light is the mechanical vibration or undulation of an imaginary ether,
postulated for this end. This ether, if it reaches the eye, beats rapidly
upon the retina, and gives us the knowledge of colour. Thus, for example,
four hundred and eighty-three billion beats in a second give red, and
seven hundred and twenty-seven billion beats in a second give violet. Upon
this theory, persons who are colour-blind must be those who are unable to
count the beats, must they not? Such crass, mechanical, clumsy, and
certainly knotty theories, which remind one of Democritus, are quite
worthy of those who, fifty years after the appearance of Goethe’s doctrine
of colour, still believe in Newton’s homogeneous light, and are not
ashamed to say so. They will find that what is overlooked in the child
(Democritus) will not be forgiven to the man. They might indeed, some day,
come to an ignominious end; but then every one would slink away and
pretend that he never had anything to do with them. We shall soon have to
speak again of this false reduction of the forces of nature to each other;
so much for the present. Supposing this theory were possible, all would
certainly be explained and established and finally reduced to an
arithmetical problem, which would then be the holiest thing in the temple
of wisdom, to which the principle of sufficient reason would at last have
happily conducted us. But all content of the phenomenon would have
disappeared, and the mere form would remain. The “what appears” would be
referred to the “how it appears,” and this “how” would be what is a
priori knowable, therefore entirely dependent on the subject, therefore
only for the subject, therefore, lastly, mere phantom, idea and form of
idea, through and through: no thing-in-itself could be demanded.
Supposing, then, that this were possible, the whole world would be derived
from the subject, and in fact, that would be accomplished which Fichte
wanted to seem to accomplish by his empty bombast. But it is not
possible: phantasies, sophisms, castles in the air, have been constructed
in this way, but science never. The many and multifarious phenomena in
nature have been successfully referred to particular original forces, and
as often as this has been done, a real advance has been made. Several
forces and qualities, which were at first regarded as different, have been
derived from each other, and thus their number has been curtailed. (For
example, magnetism from electricity.) Etiology will have reached its goal
when it has recognised and exhibited as such all the original forces of
nature, and established their mode of operation, i.e., the law according
to which, under the guidance of causality, their phenomena appear in time
and space, and determine their position with regard to each other. But
certain original forces will always remain over; there will always remain
as an insoluble residuum a content of phenomena which cannot be referred
to their form, and thus cannot be explained from something else in
accordance with the principle of sufficient reason. For in everything in
nature there is something of which no ground can ever be assigned, of
which no explanation is possible, and no ulterior cause is to be sought.
This is the specific nature of its action, i.e., the nature of its
existence, its being. Of each particular effect of the thing a cause may
be certainly indicated, from which it follows that it must act just at
this time and in this place; but no cause can ever be found from which it
follows that a thing acts in general, and precisely in the way it does. If
it has no other qualities, if it is merely a mote in a sunbeam, it yet
exhibits this unfathomable something, at least as weight and
impenetrability. But this, I say, is to the mote what his will is to a
man; and, like the human will, it is, according to its inner nature, not
subject to explanation; nay, more—it is in itself identical with this
will. It is true that a motive may be given for every manifestation of
will, for every act of will at a particular time and in a particular
place, upon which it must necessarily follow, under the presupposition of
the character of the man. But no reason can ever be given that the man has
this character; that he wills at all; that, of several motives, just this
one and no other, or indeed that any motive at all, moves his will. That
which in the case of man is the unfathomable character which is
presupposed in every explanation of his actions from motives is, in the
case of every unorganised body, its definitive quality—the mode of its
action, the manifestations of which are occasioned by impressions from
without, while it itself, on the contrary, is determined by nothing
outside itself, and thus is also inexplicable. Its particular
manifestations, through which alone it becomes visible, are subordinated
to the principle of sufficient reason; it itself is groundless. This was
in substance rightly understood by the schoolmen, who called it forma
substantialis. (Cf. Suarez, Disput. Metaph., disp. xv. sect. 1.)

It is a greater and a commoner error that the phenomena which we best
understand are those which are of most frequent occurrence, and which are
most universal and simple; for, on the contrary, these are just the
phenomena that we are most accustomed to see about us, and to be ignorant
of. It is just as inexplicable to us that a stone should fall to the earth
as that an animal should move itself. It has been supposed, as we have
remarked above, that, starting from the most universal forces of nature
(gravitation, cohesion, impenetrability), it was possible to explain from
them the rarer forces, which only operate under a combination of
circumstances (for example, chemical quality, electricity, magnetism),
and, lastly, from these to understand the organism and the life of
animals, and even the nature of human knowing and willing. Men resigned
themselves without a word to starting from mere qualitates occultæ, the
elucidation of which was entirely given up, for they intended to build
upon them, not to investigate them. Such an intention cannot, as we have
already said, be carried out. But apart from this, such structures would
always stand in the air. What is the use of explanations which ultimately
refer us to something which is quite as unknown as the problem with which
we started? Do we in the end understand more of the inner nature of these
universal natural forces than of the inner nature of an animal? Is not the
one as much a sealed book to us as the other? Unfathomable because it is
without ground, because it is the content, that which the phenomenon is,
and which can never be referred to the form, to the how, to the principle
of sufficient reason. But we, who have in view not etiology but
philosophy, that is, not relative but unconditioned knowledge of the real
nature of the world, take the opposite course, and start from that which
is immediately and most completely known to us, and fully and entirely
trusted by us—that which lies nearest to us, in order to understand that
which is known to us only at a distance, one-sidedly and indirectly. From
the most powerful, most significant, and most distinct phenomenon we seek
to arrive at an understanding of those that are less complete and weaker.
With the exception of my own body, all things are known to me only on
one side, that of the idea. Their inner nature remains hidden from me
and a profound secret, even if I know all the causes from which their
changes follow. Only by comparison with that which goes on in me if my
body performs an action when I am influenced by a motive—only by
comparison, I say, with what is the inner nature of my own changes
determined by external reasons, can I obtain insight into the way in which
these lifeless bodies change under the influence of causes, and so
understand what is their inner nature. For the knowledge of the causes of
the manifestation of this inner nature affords me merely the rule of its
appearance in time and space, and nothing more. I can make this comparison
because my body is the only object of which I know not merely the one
side, that of the idea, but also the other side which is called will.
Thus, instead of believing that I would better understand my own
organisation, and then my own knowing and willing, and my movements
following upon motives, if I could only refer them to movements due to
electrical, chemical, and mechanical causes, I must, seeing that I seek
philosophy and not etiology, learn to understand from my own movements
following upon motives the inner nature of the simplest and commonest
movements of an unorganised body which I see following upon causes. I must
recognise the inscrutable forces which manifest themselves in all natural
bodies as identical in kind with that which in me is the will, and as
differing from it only in degree. That is to say, the fourth class of
ideas given in the Essay on the Principle of Sufficient Reason must be the
key to the knowledge of the inner nature of the first class, and by means
of the law of motivation I must come to understand the inner meaning of
the law of causation.

Spinoza (Epist. 62) says that if a stone which has been projected through
the air had consciousness, it would believe that it was moving of its own
will. I add to this only that the stone would be right. The impulse given
it is for the stone what the motive is for me, and what in the case of the
stone appears as cohesion, gravitation, rigidity, is in its inner nature
the same as that which I recognise in myself as will, and what the stone
also, if knowledge were given to it, would recognise as will. In the
passage referred to, Spinoza had in view the necessity with which the
stone flies, and he rightly desires to transfer this necessity to that of
the particular act of will of a person. I, on the other hand, consider the
inner being, which alone imparts meaning and validity to all real
necessity (i.e., effect following upon a cause) as its presupposition.
In the case of men this is called character; in the case of a stone it is
called quality, but it is the same in both. When it is immediately known
it is called will. In the stone it has the weakest, and in man the
strongest degree of visibility, of objectivity. St. Augustine recognises,
with a true instinct, this identity of the tendencies of all things with
our own willing, and I cannot refrain from quoting his naïve account of
the matter:—“Si pecora essemus, carnalem vitam et quod secundum sensum
ejusdem est amaremus, idque esset sufficiens bonum nostrum, et secundum
hoc si esset nobis bene, nihil aliud quæreremus. Item, si arbores essemus,
nihil quidem sentientes motu amare possemus: verumtamen id quasi appetere
videremur, quo feracius essemus, uberiusque fructuosæ. Si essemus lapides,
aut fluctus, aut ventus, aut flamma, vel quid ejusmodi, sine ullo quidem
sensu atque vita, non tamen nobis deesset quasi quidam nostrorum locorum
atque ordinis appetitus. Nam velut amores corporum momenta sunt ponderum,
sive deorsum gravitate, sive sursum levitate nitantur: ita enim corpus
pondere, sicut animus amore fertur quocunque fertur” (De Civ. Dei, xi.
28).

It ought further to be mentioned that Euler saw that the inner nature of
gravitation must ultimately be referred to an “inclination and desire”
(thus will) peculiar to material bodies (in the 68th letter to the
Princess). Indeed, it is just this that makes him averse to the conception
of gravitation as it existed for Newton, and he is inclined to try a
modification of it in accordance with the earlier Cartesian theory, and so
to derive gravitation from the impact of an ether upon the bodies, as
being “more rational and more suitable for persons who like clear and
intelligible principles.” He wishes to banish attraction from physics as a
qualitas occulta. This is only in keeping with the dead view of nature
which prevailed at Euler’s time as the correlative of the immaterial soul.
It is only worth noticing because of its bearing upon the fundamental
truth established by me, which even at that time this fine intellect saw
glimmering in the distance. He hastened to turn in time, and then, in his
anxiety at seeing all the prevalent fundamental views endangered, he
sought safety in the old and already exploded absurdities.

We know that multiplicity in general is necessarily conditioned by space
and time, and is only thinkable in them. In this respect they are called
the principium individuationis. But we have found that space and time
are forms of the principle of sufficient reason. In this principle all our
knowledge a priori is expressed, but, as we showed above, this a
priori knowledge, as such, only applies to the knowableness of things,
not to the things themselves, i.e., it is only our form of knowledge, it
is not a property of the thing-in-itself. The thing-in-itself is, as such,
free from all forms of knowledge, even the most universal, that of being
an object for the subject. In other words, the thing-in-itself is
something altogether different from the idea. If, now, this
thing-in-itself is the will, as I believe I have fully and convincingly
proved it to be, then, regarded as such and apart from its manifestation,
it lies outside time and space, and therefore knows no multiplicity, and
is consequently one. Yet, as I have said, it is not one in the sense in
which an individual or a concept is one, but as something to which the
condition of the possibility of multiplicity, the principium
individuationis, is foreign. The multiplicity of things in space and
time, which collectively constitute the objectification of will, does not
affect the will itself, which remains indivisible notwithstanding it. It
is not the case that, in some way or other, a smaller part of will is in
the stone and a larger part in the man, for the relation of part and whole
belongs exclusively to space, and has no longer any meaning when we go
beyond this form of intuition or perception. The more and the less have
application only to the phenomenon of will, that is, its visibility, its
objectification. Of this there is a higher grade in the plant than in the
stone; in the animal a higher grade than in the plant: indeed, the passage
of will into visibility, its objectification, has grades as innumerable as
exist between the dimmest twilight and the brightest sunshine, the loudest
sound and the faintest echo. We shall return later to the consideration of
these grades of visibility which belong to the objectification of the
will, to the reflection of its nature. But as the grades of its
objectification do not directly concern the will itself, still less is it
concerned by the multiplicity of the phenomena of these different grades,
i.e., the multitude of individuals of each form, or the particular
manifestations of each force. For this multiplicity is directly
conditioned by time and space, into which the will itself never enters.
The will reveals itself as completely and as much in one oak as in
millions. Their number and multiplication in space and time has no meaning
with regard to it, but only with regard to the multiplicity of individuals
who know in space and time, and who are themselves multiplied and
dispersed in these. The multiplicity of these individuals itself belongs
not to the will, but only to its manifestation. We may therefore say that
if, per impossibile, a single real existence, even the most
insignificant, were to be entirely annihilated, the whole world would
necessarily perish with it. The great mystic Angelus Silesius feels this
when he says—


    “I know God cannot live an instant without me,
    He must give up the ghost if I should cease to be.”


Men have tried in various ways to bring the immeasurable greatness of the
material universe nearer to the comprehension of us all, and then they
have seized the opportunity to make edifying remarks. They have referred
perhaps to the relative smallness of the earth, and indeed of man; or, on
the contrary, they have pointed out the greatness of the mind of this man
who is so insignificant—the mind that can solve, comprehend, and even
measure the greatness of the universe, and so forth. Now, all this is very
well, but to me, when I consider the vastness of the world, the most
important point is this, that the thing-in-itself, whose manifestation is
the world—whatever else it may be—cannot have its true self spread out and
dispersed after this fashion in boundless space, but that this endless
extension belongs only to its manifestation. The thing-in-itself, on the
contrary, is present entire and undivided in every object of nature and in
every living being. Therefore we lose nothing by standing still beside any
single individual thing, and true wisdom is not to be gained by measuring
out the boundless world, or, what would be more to the purpose, by
actually traversing endless space. It is rather to be attained by the
thorough investigation of any individual thing, for thus we seek to arrive
at a full knowledge and understanding of its true and peculiar nature.

The subject which will therefore be fully considered in the next book, and
which has, doubtless, already presented itself to the mind of every
student of Plato, is, that these different grades of the objectification
of will which are manifested in innumerable individuals, and exist as
their unattained types or as the eternal forms of things, not entering
themselves into time and space, which are the medium of individual things,
but remaining fixed, subject to no change, always being, never becoming,
while the particular things arise and pass away, always become and never
are,—that these grades of the objectification of will are, I say, simply
Plato’s Ideas. I make this passing reference to the matter here in order
that I may be able in future to use the word Idea in this sense. In my
writings, therefore, the word is always to be understood in its true and
original meaning given to it by Plato, and has absolutely no reference to
those abstract productions of dogmatising scholastic reason, which Kant
has inaptly and illegitimately used this word to denote, though Plato had
already appropriated and used it most fitly. By Idea, then, I understand
every definite and fixed grade of the objectification of will, so far as
it is thing-in-itself, and therefore has no multiplicity. These grades are
related to individual things as their eternal forms or prototypes. The
shortest and most concise statement of this famous Platonic doctrine is
given us by Diogenes Laertes (iii. 12): “ὁ Πλατων φησι, εν τῃ φυσει τας
ιδεας ἑσταναι, καθαπερ παραδειγματα, τα δ᾽ αλλα ταυταις εοικεναι, τουτων
ὁμοιωματα καθεστωτα”—(“Plato ideas in natura velut exemplaria dixit
subsistere; cetera his esse similia, ad istarum similitudinem
consistentia”). Of Kant’s misuse of the word I take no further notice;
what it is needful to say about it will be found in the Appendix.

§ 26. The lowest grades of the objectification of will are to be found in
those most universal forces of nature which partly appear in all matter
without exception, as gravity and impenetrability, and partly have shared
the given matter among them, so that certain of them reign in one species
of matter and others in another species, constituting its specific
difference, as rigidity, fluidity, elasticity, electricity, magnetism,
chemical properties and qualities of every kind. They are in themselves
immediate manifestations of will, just as much as human action; and as
such they are groundless, like human character. Only their particular
manifestations are subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason,
like the particular actions of men. They themselves, on the other hand,
can never be called either effect or cause, but are the prior and
presupposed conditions of all causes and effects through which their real
nature unfolds and reveals itself. It is therefore senseless to demand a
cause of gravity or electricity, for they are original forces. Their
expressions, indeed, take place in accordance with the law of cause and
effect, so that every one of their particular manifestations has a cause,
which is itself again just a similar particular manifestation which
determines that this force must express itself here, must appear in space
and time; but the force itself is by no means the effect of a cause, nor
the cause of an effect. It is therefore a mistake to say “gravity is the
cause of a stone falling;” for the cause in this case is rather the
nearness of the earth, because it attracts the stone. Take the earth away
and the stone will not fall, although gravity remains. The force itself
lies quite outside the chain of causes and effects, which presupposes
time, because it only has meaning in relation to it; but the force lies
outside time. The individual change always has for its cause another
change just as individual as itself, and not the force of which it is the
expression. For that which always gives its efficiency to a cause, however
many times it may appear, is a force of nature. As such, it is groundless,
i.e., it lies outside the chain of causes and outside the province of
the principle of sufficient reason in general, and is philosophically
known as the immediate objectivity of will, which is the “in-itself” of
the whole of nature; but in etiology, which in this reference is physics,
it is set down as an original force, i.e., a qualitas occulta.

In the higher grades of the objectivity of will we see individuality
occupy a prominent position, especially in the case of man, where it
appears as the great difference of individual characters, i.e., as
complete personality, outwardly expressed in strongly marked individual
physiognomy, which influences the whole bodily form. None of the brutes
have this individuality in anything like so high a degree, though the
higher species of them have a trace of it; but the character of the
species completely predominates over it, and therefore they have little
individual physiognomy. The farther down we go, the more completely is
every trace of the individual character lost in the common character of
the species, and the physiognomy of the species alone remains. We know the
physiological character of the species, and from that we know exactly what
is to be expected from the individual; while, on the contrary, in the
human species every individual has to be studied and fathomed for himself,
which, if we wish to forecast his action with some degree of certainty,
is, on account of the possibility of concealment that first appears with
reason, a matter of the greatest difficulty. It is probably connected with
this difference of the human species from all others, that the folds and
convolutions of the brain, which are entirely wanting in birds, and very
weakly marked in rodents, are even in the case of the higher animals far
more symmetrical on both sides, and more constantly the same in each
individual, than in the case of human beings.(34) It is further to be
regarded as a phenomenon of this peculiar individual character which
distinguishes men from all the lower animals, that in the case of the
brutes the sexual instinct seeks its satisfaction without observable
choice of objects, while in the case of man this choice is, in a purely
instinctive manner and independent of all reflection, carried so far that
it rises into a powerful passion. While then every man is to be regarded
as a specially determined and characterised phenomenon of will, and indeed
to a certain extent as a special Idea, in the case of the brutes this
individual character as a whole is wanting, because only the species has a
special significance. And the farther we go from man, the fainter becomes
the trace of this individual character, so that plants have no individual
qualities left, except such as may be fully explained from the favourable
or unfavourable external influences of soil, climate, and other accidents.
Finally, in the inorganic kingdom of nature all individuality disappears.
The crystal alone is to be regarded as to a certain extent individual. It
is a unity of the tendency in definite directions, fixed by
crystallisation, which makes the trace of this tendency permanent. It is
at the same time a cumulative repetition of its primitive form, bound into
unity by an idea, just as the tree is an aggregate of the single
germinating fibre which shows itself in every rib of the leaves, in every
leaf, in every branch; which repeats itself, and to some extent makes each
of these appear as a separate growth, nourishing itself from the greater
as a parasite, so that the tree, resembling the crystal, is a systematic
aggregate of small plants, although only the whole is the complete
expression of an individual Idea, i.e., of this particular grade of the
objectification of will. But the individuals of the same species of
crystal can have no other difference than such as is produced by external
accidents; indeed we can make at pleasure large or small crystals of every
species. The individual, however, as such, that is, with traces of an
individual character, does not exist further in unorganised nature. All
its phenomena are expressions of general forces of nature, i.e., of
those grades of the objectification of will which do not objectify
themselves (as is the case in organised nature), by means of the
difference of the individualities which collectively express the whole of
the Idea, but show themselves only in the species, and as a whole, without
any variation in each particular example of it. Time, space, multiplicity,
and existence conditioned by causes, do not belong to the will or to the
Idea (the grade of the objectification of will), but only to their
particular phenomena. Therefore such a force of nature as, for example,
gravity or electricity, must show itself as such in precisely the same way
in all its million phenomena, and only external circumstances can modify
these. This unity of its being in all its phenomena, this unchangeable
constancy of the appearance of these, whenever, under the guidance of
causality, the necessary conditions are present, is called a law of
nature. If such a law is once learned from experience, then the
phenomenon of that force of nature, the character of which is expressed
and laid down in it, may be accurately forecast and counted upon. But it
is just this conformity to law of the phenomena of the lower grades of the
objectification of will which gives them such a different aspect from the
phenomena of the same will in the higher, i.e., the more distinct,
grades of its objectification, in animals, and in men and their actions,
where the stronger or weaker influence of the individual character and the
susceptibility to motives which often remain hidden from the spectator,
because they lie in knowledge, has had the result that the identity of the
inner nature of the two kinds of phenomena has hitherto been entirely
overlooked.

If we start from the knowledge of the particular, and not from that of the
Idea, there is something astonishing, and sometimes even terrible, in the
absolute uniformity of the laws of nature. It might astonish us that
nature never once forgets her laws; that if, for example, it has once been
according to a law of nature that where certain materials are brought
together under given conditions, a chemical combination will take place,
or gas will be evolved, or they will go on fire; if these conditions are
fulfilled, whether by our interposition or entirely by chance (and in this
case the accuracy is the more astonishing because unexpected), to-day just
as well as a thousand years ago, the determined phenomenon will take place
at once and without delay. We are most vividly impressed with the
marvellousness of this fact in the case of rare phenomena, which only
occur under very complex circumstances, but which we are previously
informed will take place if these conditions are fulfilled. For example,
when we are told that if certain metals, when arranged alternately in
fluid with which an acid has been mixed, are brought into contact, silver
leaf brought between the extremities of this combination will suddenly be
consumed in a green flame; or that under certain conditions the hard
diamond turns into carbonic acid. It is the ghostly omnipresence of
natural forces that astonishes us in such cases, and we remark here what
in the case of phenomena which happen daily no longer strikes us, how the
connection between cause and effect is really as mysterious as that which
is imagined between a magic formula and a spirit that must appear when
invoked by it. On the other hand, if we have attained to the philosophical
knowledge that a force of nature is a definite grade of the
objectification of will, that is to say, a definite grade of that which we
recognise as our own inmost nature, and that this will, in itself, and
distinguished from its phenomena and their forms, lies outside time and
space, and that, therefore, the multiplicity, which is conditioned by time
and space, does not belong to it, nor directly to the grade of its
objectification, i.e., the Idea, but only to the phenomena of the Idea;
and if we remember that the law of causality has significance only in
relation to time and space, inasmuch as it determines the position of the
multitude of phenomena of the different Ideas in which the will reveals
itself, governing the order in which they must appear; if, I say, in this
knowledge the inner meaning of the great doctrine of Kant has been fully
grasped, the doctrine that time, space, and causality do not belong to the
thing-in-itself, but merely to the phenomenon, that they are only the
forms of our knowledge, not qualities of things in themselves; then we
shall understand that this astonishment at the conformity to law and
accurate operation of a force of nature, this astonishment at the complete
sameness of all its million phenomena and the infallibility of their
occurrence, is really like that of a child or a savage who looks for the
first time through a glass with many facets at a flower, and marvels at
the complete similarity of the innumerable flowers which he sees, and
counts the leaves of each of them separately.

Thus every universal, original force of nature is nothing but a low grade
of the objectification of will, and we call every such grade an eternal
Idea in Plato’s sense. But a law of nature is the relation of the Idea
to the form of its manifestation. This form is time, space, and causality,
which are necessarily and inseparably connected and related to each other.
Through time and space the Idea multiplies itself in innumerable
phenomena, but the order according to which it enters these forms of
multiplicity is definitely determined by the law of causality; this law is
as it were the norm of the limit of these phenomena of different Ideas, in
accordance with which time, space, and matter are assigned to them. This
norm is therefore necessarily related to the identity of the aggregate of
existing matter, which is the common substratum of all those different
phenomena. If all these were not directed to that common matter in the
possession of which they must be divided, there would be no need for such
a law to decide their claims. They might all at once and together fill a
boundless space throughout an endless time. Therefore, because all these
phenomena of the eternal Ideas are directed to one and the same matter,
must there be a rule for their appearance and disappearance; for if there
were not, they would not make way for each other. Thus the law of
causality is essentially bound up with that of the permanence of
substance; they reciprocally derive significance from each other. Time and
space, again, are related to them in the same way. For time is merely the
possibility of conflicting states of the same matter, and space is merely
the possibility of the permanence of the same matter under all sorts of
conflicting states. Accordingly, in the preceding book we explained matter
as the union of space and time, and this union shows itself as change of
the accidents in the permanence of the substance, of which causality or
becoming is the universal possibility. And accordingly, we said that
matter is through and through causality. We explained the understanding as
the subjective correlative of causality, and said matter (and thus the
whole world as idea) exists only for the understanding; the understanding
is its condition, its supporter as its necessary correlative. I repeat all
this in passing, merely to call to mind what was demonstrated in the First
Book, for it is necessary for the complete understanding of these two
books that their inner agreement should be observed, since what is
inseparably united in the actual world as its two sides, will and idea,
has, in order that we might understand each of them more clearly in
isolation, been dissevered in these two books.

It may not perhaps be superfluous to elucidate further by an example how
the law of causality has meaning only in relation to time and space, and
the matter which consists in the union of the two. For it determines the
limits in accordance with which the phenomena of the forces of nature
divide themselves in the possession of matter, while the original forces
of nature, as the immediate objectification of will, which, as a thing in
itself, is not subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason, lie
outside these forms, within which alone all etiological explanation has
validity and meaning, and just on that account can never lead us to the
inner reality of nature. For this purpose let us think of some kind of
machine constructed according to the laws of mechanics. Iron weights begin
the motion by their gravity; copper wheels resist by their rigidity,
affect and raise each other and the lever by their impenetrability, and so
on. Here gravity, rigidity, and impenetrability are original unexplained
forces; mechanics only gives us the condition under which, and the manner
in which, they manifest themselves, appear, and govern a definite matter,
time, and place. If, now, a strong magnet is made to attract the iron of
the weight, and overcome its gravity, the movement of the machine stops,
and the matter becomes forthwith the scene of quite a different force of
nature—magnetism, of which etiology again gives no further explanation
than the condition under which it appears. Or let us suppose that the
copper discs of such a machine are laid upon zinc plates, and an acid
solution introduced between them. At once the same matter of the machine
has become subject to another original force, galvanism, which now governs
it according to its own laws, and reveals itself in it through its
phenomena; and etiology can again tell us nothing about this force except
the conditions under which, and the laws in accordance with which, it
manifests itself. Let us now raise the temperature and add pure acid; the
whole machine burns; that is to say, once more an entirely different force
of nature, chemical energy, asserts at this time and in this place
irresistible claims to this particular matter, and reveals itself in it as
Idea, as a definite grade of the objectification of will. The calcined
metal thus produced now unites with an acid, and a salt is obtained which
forms itself into crystals. These are the phenomena of another Idea, which
in itself is again quite inexplicable, while the appearance of its
phenomena is dependent upon certain conditions which etiology can give us.
The crystals dissolve, mix with other materials, and vegetation springs up
from them—a new phenomenon of will: and so the same permanent matter may
be followed ad infinitum, to observe how now this and now that natural
force obtains a right to it and temporarily takes possession of it, in
order to appear and reveal its own nature. The condition of this right,
the point of time and space at which it becomes valid, is given by
causality, but the explanation founded upon this law only extends thus
far. The force itself is a manifestation of will, and as such is not
subject to the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, that is, it is
groundless. It lies outside all time, is omnipresent, and seems as it were
to wait constantly till the circumstances occur under which it can appear
and take possession of a definite matter, supplanting the forces which
have reigned in it till then. All time exists only for the phenomena of
such a force, and is without significance for the force itself. Through
thousands of years chemical forces slumber in matter till the contact with
the reagents sets them free; then they appear; but time exists only for
the phenomena, not for the forces themselves. For thousands of years
galvanism slumbered in copper and zinc, and they lay quietly beside
silver, which must be consumed in flame as soon as all three are brought
together under the required conditions. Even in the organic kingdom we see
a dry seed preserve the slumbering force through three thousand years, and
when at last the favourable circumstances occur, grow up as a plant.(35)

If by this exposition the difference between a force of nature and all its
phenomena has been made quite distinct; if we have seen clearly that the
former is the will itself at this particular grade of its objectification,
but that multiplicity comes to phenomena only through time and space, and
that the law of causality is nothing but the determination of the position
of these phenomena in time and space; then we shall recognise the complete
truth and the deep meaning of Malebranche’s doctrine of occasional causes
(causes occasionelles). It is well worth while comparing this doctrine
of his, as he explains it in the “Recherches de la Vérite,” both in the
3rd Chapter of the second part of the 6th Book, and in the
éclaircissements appended to this chapter, with this exposition of mine,
and observing the complete agreement of the two doctrines in the case of
such different systems of thought. Indeed I cannot help admiring how
Malebranche, though thoroughly involved in the positive dogmas which his
age inevitably forced upon him, yet, in such bonds and under such a
burden, hit the truth so happily, so correctly, and even knew how to
combine it with these dogmas, at all events verbally.

For the power of truth is incredibly great and of unspeakable endurance.
We find constant traces of it in all, even the most eccentric and absurd
dogmas, of different times and different lands,—often indeed in strange
company, curiously mixed up with other things, but still recognisable. It
is like a plant that germinates under a heap of great stones, but still
struggles up to the light, working itself through with many deviations and
windings, disfigured, worn out, stunted in its growth,—but yet, to the
light.

In any case Malebranche is right: every natural cause is only an
occasional cause. It only gives opportunity or occasion for the
manifestation of the one indivisible will which is the “in-itself” of all
things, and whose graduated objectification is the whole visible world.
Only the appearance, the becoming visible, in this place, at this time, is
brought about by the cause and is so far dependent on it, but not the
whole of the phenomenon, nor its inner nature. This is the will itself, to
which the principle of sufficient reason has not application, and which is
therefore groundless. Nothing in the world has a sufficient cause of its
existence generally, but only a cause of existence just here and just now.
That a stone exhibits now gravity, now rigidity, now electricity, now
chemical qualities, depends upon causes, upon impressions upon it from
without, and is to be explained from these. But these qualities
themselves, and thus the whole inner nature of the stone which consists in
them, and therefore manifests itself in all the ways referred to; thus, in
general, that the stone is such as it is, that it exists generally—all
this, I say, has no ground, but is the visible appearance of the
groundless will. Every cause is thus an occasional cause. We have found it
to be so in nature, which is without knowledge, and it is also precisely
the same when motives and not causes or stimuli determine the point at
which the phenomena are to appear, that is to say, in the actions of
animals and human beings. For in both cases it is one and the same will
which appears; very different in the grades of its manifestation,
multiplied in the phenomena of these grades, and, in respect of these,
subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason, but in itself free
from all this. Motives do not determine the character of man, but only the
phenomena of his character, that is, his actions; the outward fashion of
his life, not its inner meaning and content. These proceed from the
character which is the immediate manifestation of the will, and is
therefore groundless. That one man is bad and another good, does not
depend upon motives or outward influences, such as teaching and preaching,
and is in this sense quite inexplicable. But whether a bad man shows his
badness in petty acts of injustice, cowardly tricks, and low knavery which
he practises in the narrow sphere of his circumstances, or whether as a
conqueror he oppresses nations, throws a world into lamentation, and sheds
the blood of millions; this is the outward form of his manifestation, that
which is unessential to it, and depends upon the circumstances in which
fate has placed him, upon his surroundings, upon external influences, upon
motives; but his decision upon these motives can never be explained from
them; it proceeds from the will, of which this man is a manifestation. Of
this we shall speak in the Fourth Book. The manner in which the character
discloses its qualities is quite analogous to the way in which those of
every material body in unconscious nature are disclosed. Water remains
water with its intrinsic qualities, whether as a still lake it reflects
its banks, or leaps in foam from the cliffs, or, artificially confined,
spouts in a long jet into the air. All that depends upon external causes;
the one form is as natural to it as the other, but it will always show the
same form in the same circumstances; it is equally ready for any, but in
every case true to its character, and at all times revealing this alone.
So will every human character under all circumstances reveal itself, but
the phenomena which proceed from it will always be in accordance with the
circumstances.

§ 27. If, from the foregoing consideration of the forces of nature and
their phenomena, we have come to see clearly how far an explanation from
causes can go, and where it must stop if it is not to degenerate into the
vain attempt to reduce the content of all phenomena to their mere form, in
which case there would ultimately remain nothing but form, we shall be
able to settle in general terms what is to be demanded of etiology as a
whole. It must seek out the causes of all phenomena in nature, i.e., the
circumstances under which they invariably appear. Then it must refer the
multitude of phenomena which have various forms in various circumstances
to what is active in every phenomenon, and is presupposed in the
cause,—original forces of nature. It must correctly distinguish between a
difference of the phenomenon which arises from a difference of the force,
and one which results merely from a difference of the circumstances under
which the force expresses itself; and with equal care it must guard
against taking the expressions of one and the same force under different
circumstances for the manifestations of different forces, and conversely
against taking for manifestations of one and the same force what
originally belongs to different forces. Now this is the direct work of the
faculty of judgment, and that is why so few men are capable of increasing
our insight in physics, while all are able to enlarge experience.
Indolence and ignorance make us disposed to appeal too soon to original
forces. This is exemplified with an exaggeration that savours of irony in
the entities and quidities of the schoolmen. Nothing is further from my
desire than to favour their resuscitation. We have just as little right to
appeal to the objectification of will, instead of giving a physical
explanation, as we have to appeal to the creative power of God. For
physics demands causes, and the will is never a cause. Its whole relation
to the phenomenon is not in accordance with the principle of sufficient
reason. But that which in itself is the will exists in another aspect as
idea; that is to say, is phenomenon. As such, it obeys the laws which
constitute the form of the phenomenon. Every movement, for example,
although it is always a manifestation of will, must yet have a cause from
which it is to be explained in relation to a particular time and space;
that is, not in general in its inner nature, but as a particular
phenomenon. In the case of the stone, this is a mechanical cause; in that
of the movement of a man, it is a motive; but in no case can it be
wanting. On the other hand, the universal common nature of all phenomena
of one particular kind, that which must be presupposed if the explanation
from causes is to have any sense and meaning, is the general force of
nature, which, in physics, must remain a qualitas occulta, because with
it the etiological explanation ends and the metaphysical begins. But the
chain of causes and effects is never broken by an original force to which
it has been necessary to appeal. It does not run back to such a force as
if it were its first link, but the nearest link, as well as the remotest,
presupposes the original force, and could otherwise explain nothing. A
series of causes and effects may be the manifestation of the most
different kinds of forces, whose successive visible appearances are
conducted through it, as I have illustrated above by the example of a
metal machine. But the difference of these original forces, which cannot
be referred to each other, by no means breaks the unity of that chain of
causes, and the connection between all its links. The etiology and the
philosophy of nature never do violence to each other, but go hand in hand,
regarding the same object from different points of view. Etiology gives an
account of the causes which necessarily produce the particular phenomenon
to be explained. It exhibits, as the foundation of all its explanations,
the universal forces which are active in all these causes and effects. It
accurately defines, enumerates, and distinguishes these forces, and then
indicates all the different effects in which each force appears, regulated
by the difference of the circumstances, always in accordance with its own
peculiar character, which it discloses in obedience to an invariable rule,
called a law of nature. When all this has been thoroughly accomplished
by physics in every particular, it will be complete, and its work will be
done. There will then remain no unknown force in unorganised nature, nor
any effect, which has not been proved to be the manifestation of one of
these forces under definite circumstances, in accordance with a law of
nature. Yet a law of nature remains merely the observed rule according to
which nature invariably proceeds whenever certain definite circumstances
occur. Therefore a law of nature may be defined as a fact expressed
generally—un fait généralisé—and thus a complete enumeration of all the
laws of nature would only be a complete register of facts. The
consideration of nature as a whole is thus completed in morphology,
which enumerates, compares, and arranges all the enduring forms of
organised nature. Of the causes of the appearance of the individual
creature it has little to say, for in all cases this is procreation (the
theory of which is a separate matter), and in rare cases the generatio
æquivoca. But to this last belongs, strictly speaking, the manner in
which all the lower grades of the objectification of will, that is to say,
physical and chemical phenomena, appear as individual, and it is precisely
the task of etiology to point out the conditions of this appearance.
Philosophy, on the other hand, concerns itself only with the universal, in
nature as everywhere else. The original forces themselves are here its
object, and it recognises in them the different grades of the objectivity
of will, which is the inner nature, the “in-itself” of this world; and
when it regards the world apart from will, it explains it as merely the
idea of the subject. But if etiology, instead of preparing the way for
philosophy, and supplying its doctrines with practical application by
means of instances, supposes that its aim is rather to deny the existence
of all original forces, except perhaps one, the most general, for
example, impenetrability, which it imagines it thoroughly understands, and
consequently seeks forcibly to refer all the others to it—it forsakes its
own province and can only give us error instead of truth. The content of
nature is supplanted by its form, everything is ascribed to the
circumstances which work from without, and nothing to the inner nature of
the thing. Now if it were possible to succeed by this method, a problem in
arithmetic would ultimately, as we have already remarked, solve the riddle
of the universe. But this is the method adopted by those, referred to
above, who think that all physiological effects ought to be reduced to
form and combination, this, perhaps, to electricity, and this again to
chemism, and chemism to mechanism. The mistake of Descartes, for example,
and of all the Atomists, was of this last description. They referred the
movements of the globe to the impact of a fluid, and the qualities of
matter to the connection and form of the atoms, and hence they laboured to
explain all the phenomena of nature as merely manifestations of
impenetrability and cohesion. Although this has been given up, precisely
the same error is committed in our own day by the electrical, chemical,
and mechanical physiologists, who obstinately attempt to explain the whole
of life and all the functions of the organism from “form and combination.”
In Meckel’s “Archiv für Physiologie” (1820, vol. v. p. 185) we still find
it stated that the aim of physiological explanation is the reduction of
organic life to the universal forces with which physics deals. Lamarck
also, in his “Philosophie Zoologique,” explains life as merely the
effect of warmth and electricity: le calorique et la matière électrique
suffisent parfaitement pour composer ensemble cette cause essentielle de
la vie (p. 16). According to this, warmth and electricity would be the
“thing-in-itself,” and the world of animals and plants its phenomenal
appearance. The absurdity of this opinion becomes glaringly apparent at
the 306th and following pages of that work. It is well known that all
these opinions, that have been so often refuted, have reappeared quite
recently with renewed confidence. If we carefully examine the foundation
of these views, we shall find that they ultimately involve the
presupposition that the organism is merely an aggregate of phenomena of
physical, chemical, and mechanical forces, which have come together here
by chance, and produced the organism as a freak of nature without further
significance. The organism of an animal or of a human being would
therefore be, if considered philosophically, not the exhibition of a
special Idea, that is, not itself immediate objectivity of the will at a
definite higher grade, but in it would appear only those Ideas which
objectify the will in electricity, in chemism, and in mechanism. Thus the
organism would be as fortuitously constructed by the concurrence of these
forces as the forms of men and beasts in clouds and stalactites, and would
therefore in itself be no more interesting than they are. However, we
shall see immediately how far the application of physical and chemical
modes of explanation to the organism may yet, within certain limits, be
allowable and useful; for I shall explain that the vital force certainly
avails itself of and uses the forces of unorganised nature; yet these
forces no more constitute the vital force than a hammer and anvil make a
blacksmith. Therefore even the most simple example of plant life can never
be explained from these forces by any theory of capillary attraction and
endosmose, much less animal life. The following observations will prepare
the way for this somewhat difficult discussion.

It follows from all that has been said that it is certainly an error on
the part of natural science to seek to refer the higher grades of the
objectification of will to the lower; for the failure to recognise, or the
denial of, original and self-existing forces of nature is just as wrong as
the groundless assumption of special forces when what occurs is merely a
peculiar kind of manifestation of what is already known. Thus Kant rightly
says that it would be absurd to hope for a blade of grass from a Newton,
that is, from one who reduced the blade of grass to the manifestations of
physical and chemical forces, of which it was the chance product, and
therefore a mere freak of nature, in which no special Idea appeared,
i.e., the will did not directly reveal itself in it in a higher and
specific grade, but just as in the phenomena of unorganised nature and by
chance in this form. The schoolmen, who certainly would not have allowed
such a doctrine, would rightly have said that it was a complete denial of
the forma substantialis, and a degradation of it to the forma
accidentalis. For the forma substantialis of Aristotle denotes exactly
what I call the grade of the objectification of will in a thing. On the
other hand, it is not to be overlooked that in all Ideas, that is, in all
forces of unorganised, and all forms of organised nature, it is one and
the same will that reveals itself, that is to say, which enters the form
of the idea and passes into objectivity. Its unity must therefore be
also recognisable through an inner relationship between all its phenomena.
Now this reveals itself in the higher grades of the objectification of
will, where the whole phenomenon is more distinct, thus in the vegetable
and animal kingdoms, through the universally prevailing analogy of all
forms, the fundamental type which recurs in all phenomena. This has,
therefore, become the guiding principle of the admirable zoological system
which was originated by the French in this century, and it is most
completely established in comparative anatomy as l’unité de plan,
l’uniformité de l’élément anatomique. To discover this fundamental type
has been the chief concern, or at any rate the praiseworthy endeavour, of
the natural philosophers of the school of Schelling, who have in this
respect considerable merit, although in many cases their hunt after
analogies in nature degenerated into mere conceits. They have, however,
rightly shown that that general relationship and family likeness exists
also in the Ideas of unorganised nature; for example, between electricity
and magnetism, the identity of which was afterwards established; between
chemical attraction and gravitation, and so forth. They specially called
attention to the fact that polarity, that is, the sundering of a force
into two qualitatively different and opposed activities striving after
reunion, which also shows itself for the most part in space as a
dispersion in opposite directions, is a fundamental type of almost all the
phenomena of nature, from the magnet and the crystal to man himself. Yet
this knowledge has been current in China from the earliest times, in the
doctrine of opposition of Yin and Yang. Indeed, since all things in the
world are the objectification of one and the same will, and therefore in
their inner nature identical, it must not only be the case that there is
that unmistakable analogy between them, and that in every phenomenon the
trace, intimation, and plan of the higher phenomenon that lies next to it
in point of development shows itself, but also because all these forms
belong to the world as idea, it is indeed conceivable that even in the
most universal forms of the idea, in that peculiar framework of the
phenomenal world space and time, it may be possible to discern and
establish the fundamental type, intimation, and plan of what fills the
forms. It seems to have been a dim notion of this that was the origin of
the Cabala and all the mathematical philosophy of the Pythagoreans, and
also of the Chinese in Y-king. In the school of Schelling also, to which
we have already referred, we find, among their efforts to bring to light
the similarity among the phenomena of nature, several attempts (though
rather unfortunate ones) to deduce laws of nature from the laws of pure
space and time. However, one can never tell to what extent a man of genius
will realise both endeavours.

Now, although the difference between phenomenon and thing-in-itself is
never lost sight of, and therefore the identity of the will which
objectifies itself in all Ideas can never (because it has different grades
of its objectification) be distorted to mean identity of the particular
Ideas themselves in which it appears, so that, for example, chemical or
electrical attraction can never be reduced to the attraction of
gravitation, although this inner analogy is known, and the former may be
regarded as, so to speak, higher powers of the latter, just as little does
the similarity of the construction of all animals warrant us in mixing and
identifying the species and explaining the more developed as mere
variations of the less developed; and although, finally, the physiological
functions are never to be reduced to chemical or physical processes, yet,
in justification of this procedure, within certain limits, we may accept
the following observations as highly probable.

If several of the phenomena of will in the lower grades of its
objectification—that is, in unorganised nature—come into conflict because
each of them, under the guidance of causality, seeks to possess a given
portion of matter, there arises from the conflict the phenomenon of a
higher Idea which prevails over all the less developed phenomena
previously there, yet in such a way that it allows the essence of these to
continue to exist in a subordinate manner, in that it takes up into itself
from them something which is analogous to them. This process is only
intelligible from the identity of the will which manifests itself in all
the Ideas, and which is always striving after higher objectification. We
thus see, for example, in the hardening of the bones, an unmistakable
analogy to crystallisation, as the force which originally had possession
of the chalk, although ossification is never to be reduced to
crystallisation. The analogy shows itself in a weaker degree in the flesh
becoming firm. The combination of humours in the animal body and secretion
are also analogous to chemical combination and separation. Indeed, the
laws of chemistry are still strongly operative in this case, but
subordinated, very much modified, and mastered by a higher Idea; therefore
mere chemical forces outside the organism will never afford us such
humours; but


    “Encheiresin naturæ nennt es die Chemie,
    Spottet ihrer selbst und weiss nicht wie.”


The more developed Idea resulting from this victory over several lower
Ideas or objectifications of will, gains an entirely new character by
taking up into itself from every Idea over which it has prevailed a
strengthened analogy. The will objectifies itself in a new, more distinct
way. It originally appears in generatio æquivoca; afterwards in
assimilation to the given germ, organic moisture, plant, animal, man. Thus
from the strife of lower phenomena the higher arise, swallowing them all
up, but yet realising in the higher grade the tendency of all the lower.
Here, then, already the law applies—Serpens nisi serpentem comederit non
fit draco.

I wish it had been possible for me to dispel by clearness of explanation
the obscurity which clings to the subject of these thoughts; but I see
very well that the reader’s own consideration of the matter must
materially aid me if I am not to remain uncomprehended or misunderstood.
According to the view I have expressed, the traces of chemical and
physical modes of operation will indeed be found in the organism, but it
can never be explained from them; because it is by no means a phenomenon
even accidentally brought about through the united actions of such forces,
but a higher Idea which has overcome these lower ideas by subduing
assimilation; for the one will which objectifies itself in all Ideas
always seeks the highest possible objectification, and has therefore in
this case given up the lower grades of its manifestation after a conflict,
in order to appear in a higher grade, and one so much the more powerful.
No victory without conflict: since the higher Idea or objectification of
will can only appear through the conquest of the lower, it endures the
opposition of these lower Ideas, which, although brought into subjection,
still constantly strive to obtain an independent and complete expression
of their being. The magnet that has attracted a piece of iron carries on a
perpetual conflict with gravitation, which, as the lower objectification
of will, has a prior right to the matter of the iron; and in this constant
battle the magnet indeed grows stronger, for the opposition excites it, as
it were, to greater effort. In the same way every manifestation of the
will, including that which expresses itself in the human organism, wages a
constant war against the many physical and chemical forces which, as lower
Ideas, have a prior right to that matter. Thus the arm falls which for a
while, overcoming gravity, we have held stretched out; thus the pleasing
sensation of health, which proclaims the victory of the Idea of the
self-conscious organism over the physical and chemical laws, which
originally governed the humours of the body, is so often interrupted, and
is indeed always accompanied by greater or less discomfort, which arises
from the resistance of these forces, and on account of which the
vegetative part of our life is constantly attended by slight pain. Thus
also digestion weakens all the animal functions, because it requires the
whole vital force to overcome the chemical forces of nature by
assimilation. Hence also in general the burden of physical life, the
necessity of sleep, and, finally, of death; for at last these subdued
forces of nature, assisted by circumstances, win back from the organism,
wearied even by the constant victory, the matter it took from them, and
attain to an unimpeded expression of their being. We may therefore say
that every organism expresses the Idea of which it is the image, only
after we have subtracted the part of its force which is expended in
subduing the lower Ideas that strive with it for matter. This seems to
have been running in the mind of Jacob Böhm when he says somewhere that
all the bodies of men and animals, and even all plants, are really half
dead. According as the subjection in the organism of these forces of
nature, which express the lower grades of the objectification of will, is
more or less successful, the more or the less completely does it attain to
the expression of its Idea; that is to say, the nearer it is to the
ideal or the further from it—the ideal of beauty in its species.

Thus everywhere in nature we see strife, conflict, and alternation of
victory, and in it we shall come to recognise more distinctly that
variance with itself which is essential to the will. Every grade of the
objectification of will fights for the matter, the space, and the time of
the others. The permanent matter must constantly change its form; for
under the guidance of causality, mechanical, physical, chemical, and
organic phenomena, eagerly striving to appear, wrest the matter from each
other, for each desires to reveal its own Idea. This strife may be
followed through the whole of nature; indeed nature exists only through
it: ει γαρ μη ην το νεικος εν τοις πραγμασιν, ἑν αν ην ἁπαντα, ὡς φησιν
Εμπεδοκλης; (nam si non inesset in rebus contentio, unum omnia essent, ut
ait Empedocles. Aris. Metaph., B. 5). Yet this strife itself is only the
revelation of that variance with itself which is essential to the will.
This universal conflict becomes most distinctly visible in the animal
kingdom. For animals have the whole of the vegetable kingdom for their
food, and even within the animal kingdom every beast is the prey and the
food of another; that is, the matter in which its Idea expresses itself
must yield itself to the expression of another Idea, for each animal can
only maintain its existence by the constant destruction of some other.
Thus the will to live everywhere preys upon itself, and in different forms
is its own nourishment, till finally the human race, because it subdues
all the others, regards nature as a manufactory for its use. Yet even the
human race, as we shall see in the Fourth Book, reveals in itself with
most terrible distinctness this conflict, this variance with itself of the
will, and we find homo homini lupus. Meanwhile we can recognise this
strife, this subjugation, just as well in the lower grades of the
objectification of will. Many insects (especially ichneumon-flies) lay
their eggs on the skin, and even in the body of the larvæ of other
insects, whose slow destruction is the first work of the newly hatched
brood. The young hydra, which grows like a bud out of the old one, and
afterwards separates itself from it, fights while it is still joined to
the old one for the prey that offers itself, so that the one snatches it
out of the mouth of the other (Trembley, Polypod., ii. p. 110, and iii. p.
165). But the bulldog-ant of Australia affords us the most extraordinary
example of this kind; for if it is cut in two, a battle begins between the
head and the tail. The head seizes the tail with its teeth, and the tail
defends itself bravely by stinging the head: the battle may last for half
an hour, until they die or are dragged away by other ants. This contest
takes place every time the experiment is tried. (From a letter by Howitt
in the W. Journal, reprinted in Galignani’s Messenger, 17th November
1855.) On the banks of the Missouri one sometimes sees a mighty oak the
stem and branches of which are so encircled, fettered, and interlaced by a
gigantic wild vine, that it withers as if choked. The same thing shows
itself in the lowest grades; for example, when water and carbon are
changed into vegetable sap, or vegetables or bread into blood by organic
assimilation; and so also in every case in which animal secretion takes
place, along with the restriction of chemical forces to a subordinate mode
of activity. This also occurs in unorganised nature, when, for example,
crystals in process of formation meet, cross, and mutually disturb each
other to such an extent that they are unable to assume the pure
crystalline form, so that almost every cluster of crystals is an image of
such a conflict of will at this low grade of its objectification; or
again, when a magnet forces its magnetism upon iron, in order to express
its Idea in it; or when galvanism overcomes chemical affinity, decomposes
the closest combinations, and so entirely suspends the laws of chemistry
that the acid of a decomposed salt at the negative pole must pass to the
positive pole without combining with the alkalies through which it goes on
its way, or turning red the litmus paper that touches it. On a large scale
it shows itself in the relation between the central body and the planet,
for although the planet is in absolute dependence, yet it always resists,
just like the chemical forces in the organism; hence arises the constant
tension between centripetal and centrifugal force, which keeps the globe
in motion, and is itself an example of that universal essential conflict
of the manifestation of will which we are considering. For as every body
must be regarded as the manifestation of a will, and as will necessarily
expresses itself as a struggle, the original condition of every world that
is formed into a globe cannot be rest, but motion, a striving forward in
boundless space without rest and without end. Neither the law of inertia
nor that of causality is opposed to this: for as, according to the former,
matter as such is alike indifferent to rest and motion, its original
condition may just as well be the one as the other, therefore if we first
find it in motion, we have just as little right to assume that this was
preceded by a condition of rest, and to inquire into the cause of the
origin of the motion, as, conversely, if we found it at rest, we would
have to assume a previous motion and inquire into the cause of its
suspension. It is, therefore, not needful to seek for a first impulse for
centrifugal force, for, according to the hypothesis of Kant and Laplace,
it is, in the case of the planets, the residue of the original rotation of
the central body, from which the planets have separated themselves as it
contracted. But to this central body itself motion is essential; it always
continues its rotation, and at the same time rushes forward in endless
space, or perhaps circulates round a greater central body invisible to us.
This view entirely agrees with the conjecture of astronomers that there is
a central sun, and also with the observed advance of our whole solar
system, and perhaps of the whole stellar system to which our sun belongs.
From this we are finally led to assume a general advance of fixed stars,
together with the central sun, and this certainly loses all meaning in
boundless space (for motion in absolute space cannot be distinguished from
rest), and becomes, as is already the case from its striving and aimless
flight, an expression of that nothingness, that failure of all aim, which,
at the close of this book, we shall be obliged to recognise in the
striving of will in all its phenomena. Thus boundless space and endless
time must be the most universal and essential forms of the collective
phenomena of will, which exist for the expression of its whole being.
Lastly, we can recognise that conflict which we are considering of all
phenomena of will against each other in simple matter regarded as such;
for the real characteristic of matter is correctly expressed by Kant as
repulsive and attractive force; so that even crude matter has its
existence only in the strife of conflicting forces. If we abstract from
all chemical differences in matter, or go so far back in the chain of
causes and effects that as yet there is no chemical difference, there
remains mere matter,—the world rounded to a globe, whose life, i.e.,
objectification of will, is now constituted by the conflict between
attractive and repulsive forces, the former as gravitation pressing from
all sides towards the centre, the latter as impenetrability always
opposing the former either as rigidity or elasticity; and this constant
pressure and resistance may be regarded as the objectivity of will in its
very lowest grade, and even there it expresses its character.

We should see the will express itself here in the lowest grade as blind
striving, an obscure, inarticulate impulse, far from susceptible of being
directly known. It is the simplest and the weakest mode of its
objectification. But it appears as this blind and unconscious striving in
the whole of unorganised nature, in all those original forces of which it
is the work of physics and chemistry to discover and to study the laws,
and each of which manifests itself to us in millions of phenomena which
are exactly similar and regular, and show no trace of individual
character, but are mere multiplicity through space and time, i.e.,
through the principium individuationis, as a picture is multiplied
through the facets of a glass.

From grade to grade objectifying itself more distinctly, yet still
completely without consciousness as an obscure striving force, the will
acts in the vegetable kingdom also, in which the bond of its phenomena
consists no longer properly of causes, but of stimuli; and, finally, also
in the vegetative part of the animal phenomenon, in the production and
maturing of the animal, and in sustaining its inner economy, in which the
manifestation of will is still always necessarily determined by stimuli.
The ever-ascending grades of the objectification of will bring us at last
to the point at which the individual that expresses the Idea could no
longer receive food for its assimilation through mere movement following
upon stimuli. For such a stimulus must be waited for, but the food has now
come to be of a more special and definite kind, and with the
ever-increasing multiplicity of the individual phenomena, the crowd and
confusion has become so great that they interfere with each other, and the
chance of the individual that is moved merely by stimuli and must wait for
its food would be too unfavourable. From the point, therefore, at which
the animal has delivered itself from the egg or the womb in which it
vegetated without consciousness, its food must be sought out and selected.
For this purpose movement following upon motives, and therefore
consciousness, becomes necessary, and consequently it appears as an agent,
μηχανη, called in at this stage of the objectification of will for the
conservation of the individual and the propagation of the species. It
appears represented by the brain or a large ganglion, just as every other
effort or determination of the will which objectifies itself is
represented by an organ, that is to say, manifests itself for the idea as
an organ.(36) But with this means of assistance, this μηχανη, the world
as idea comes into existence at a stroke, with all its forms, object and
subject, time, space, multiplicity, and causality. The world now shows its
second side. Till now mere will, it becomes also idea, object of the
knowing subject. The will, which up to this point followed its tendency in
the dark with unerring certainty, has at this grade kindled for itself a
light as a means which became necessary for getting rid of the
disadvantage which arose from the throng and the complicated nature of its
manifestations, and which would have accrued precisely to the most perfect
of them. The hitherto infallible certainty and regularity with which it
worked in unorganised and merely vegetative nature, rested upon the fact
that it alone was active in its original nature, as blind impulse, will,
without assistance, and also without interruption, from a second and
entirely different world, the world as idea, which is indeed only the
image of its own inner being, but is yet of quite another nature, and now
encroaches on the connected whole of its phenomena. Hence its infallible
certainty comes to an end. Animals are already exposed to illusion, to
deception. They have, however, merely ideas of perception, no conceptions,
no reflection, and they are therefore bound to the present; they cannot
have regard for the future. It seems as if this knowledge without reason
was not in all cases sufficient for its end, and at times required, as it
were, some assistance. For the very remarkable phenomenon presents itself,
that the blind working of the will and the activity enlightened by
knowledge encroach in a most astonishing manner upon each other’s spheres
in two kinds of phenomena. In the one case we find in the very midst of
those actions of animals which are guided by perceptive knowledge and its
motives one kind of action which is accomplished apart from these, and
thus through the necessity of the blindly acting will. I refer to those
mechanical instincts which are guided by no motive or knowledge, and which
yet have the appearance of performing their work from abstract rational
motives. The other case, which is opposed to this, is that in which, on
the contrary, the light of knowledge penetrates into the workshop of the
blindly active will, and illuminates the vegetative functions of the human
organism. I mean clairvoyance. Finally, when the will has attained to the
highest grade of its objectification, that knowledge of the understanding
given to brutes to which the senses supply the data, out of which there
arises mere perception confined to what is immediately present, does not
suffice. That complicated, many-sided, imaginative being, man, with his
many needs, and exposed as he is to innumerable dangers, must, in order to
exist, be lighted by a double knowledge; a higher power, as it were, of
perceptive knowledge must be given him, and also reason, as the faculty of
framing abstract conceptions. With this there has appeared reflection,
surveying the future and the past, and, as a consequence, deliberation,
care, the power of premeditated action independent of the present, and
finally, the full and distinct consciousness of one’s own deliberate
volition as such. Now if with mere knowledge of perception there arose the
possibility of illusion and deception, by which the previous infallibility
of the blind striving of will was done away with, so that mechanical and
other instincts, as expressions of unconscious will, had to lend their
help in the midst of those that were conscious, with the entrance of
reason that certainty and infallibility of the expressions of will (which
at the other extreme in unorganised nature appeared as strict conformity
to law) is almost entirely lost; instinct disappears altogether;
deliberation, which is supposed to take the place of everything else,
begets (as was shown in the First Book) irresolution and uncertainty; then
error becomes possible, and in many cases obstructs the adequate
objectification of the will in action. For although in the character the
will has already taken its definite and unchangeable bent or direction, in
accordance with which volition, when occasioned by the presence of a
motive, invariably takes place, yet error can falsify its expressions, for
it introduces illusive motives that take the place of the real ones which
they resemble;(37) as, for example, when superstition forces on a man
imaginary motives which impel him to a course of action directly opposed
to the way in which the will would otherwise express itself in the given
circumstances. Agamemnon slays his daughter; a miser dispenses alms, out
of pure egotism, in the hope that he will some day receive an
hundred-fold; and so on.

Thus knowledge generally, rational as well as merely sensuous, proceeds
originally from the will itself, belongs to the inner being of the higher
grades of its objectification as a mere μηχανη, a means of supporting the
individual and the species, just like any organ of the body. Originally
destined for the service of the will for the accomplishment of its aims,
it remains almost throughout entirely subjected to its service: it is so
in all brutes and in almost all men. Yet we shall see in the Third Book
how in certain individual men knowledge can deliver itself from this
bondage, throw off its yoke, and, free from all the aims of will, exist
purely for itself, simply as a clear mirror of the world, which is the
source of art. Finally, in the Fourth Book, we shall see how, if this kind
of knowledge reacts on the will, it can bring about self-surrender,
i.e., resignation, which is the final goal, and indeed the inmost nature
of all virtue and holiness, and is deliverance from the world.

§ 28. We have considered the great multiplicity and diversity of the
phenomena in which the will objectifies itself, and we have seen their
endless and implacable strife with each other. Yet, according to the whole
discussion up to this point, the will itself, as thing-in-itself, is by no
means included in that multiplicity and change. The diversity of the
(Platonic) Ideas, i.e., grades of objectification, the multitude of
individuals in which each of these expresses itself, the struggle of forms
for matter,—all this does not concern it, but is only the manner of its
objectification, and only through this has an indirect relation to it, by
virtue of which it belongs to the expression of the nature of will for the
idea. As the magic-lantern shows many different pictures, which are all
made visible by one and the same light, so in all the multifarious
phenomena which fill the world together or throng after each other as
events, only one will manifests itself, of which everything is the
visibility, the objectivity, and which remains unmoved in the midst of
this change; it alone is thing-in-itself; all objects are manifestations,
or, to speak the language of Kant, phenomena. Although in man, as
(Platonic) Idea, the will finds its clearest and fullest objectification,
yet man alone could not express its being. In order to manifest the full
significance of the will, the Idea of man would need to appear, not alone
and sundered from everything else, but accompanied by the whole series of
grades, down through all the forms of animals, through the vegetable
kingdom to unorganised nature. All these supplement each other in the
complete objectification of will; they are as much presupposed by the Idea
of man as the blossoms of a tree presuppose leaves, branches, stem, and
root; they form a pyramid, of which man is the apex. If fond of similes,
one might also say that their manifestations accompany that of man as
necessarily as the full daylight is accompanied by all the gradations of
twilight, through which, little by little, it loses itself in darkness; or
one might call them the echo of man, and say: Animal and plant are the
descending fifth and third of man, the inorganic kingdom is the lower
octave. The full truth of this last comparison will only become clear to
us when, in the following book, we attempt to fathom the deep significance
of music, and see how a connected, progressive melody, made up of high,
quick notes, may be regarded as in some sense expressing the life and
efforts of man connected by reflection, while the unconnected complemental
notes and the slow bass, which make up the harmony necessary to perfect
the music, represent the rest of the animal kingdom and the whole of
nature that is without knowledge. But of this in its own place, where it
will not sound so paradoxical. We find, however, that the inner
necessity of the gradation of its manifestations, which is inseparable
from the adequate objectification of the will, is expressed by an outer
necessity in the whole of these manifestations themselves, by reason of
which man has need of the beasts for his support, the beasts in their
grades have need of each other as well as of plants, which in their turn
require the ground, water, chemical elements and their combinations, the
planet, the sun, rotation and motion round the sun, the curve of the
ellipse, &c., &c. At bottom this results from the fact that the will must
live on itself, for there exists nothing beside it, and it is a hungry
will. Hence arise eager pursuit, anxiety, and suffering.

It is only the knowledge of the unity of will as thing-in-itself, in the
endless diversity and multiplicity of the phenomena, that can afford us
the true explanation of that wonderful, unmistakable analogy of all the
productions of nature, that family likeness on account of which we may
regard them as variations on the same ungiven theme. So in like measure,
through the distinct and thoroughly comprehended knowledge of that
harmony, that essential connection of all the parts of the world, that
necessity of their gradation which we have just been considering, we shall
obtain a true and sufficient insight into the inner nature and meaning of
the undeniable teleology of all organised productions of nature, which,
indeed, we presupposed a priori, when considering and investigating
them.

This teleology is of a twofold description; sometimes an inner
teleology, that is, an agreement of all the parts of a particular
organism, so ordered that the sustenance of the individual and the species
results from it, and therefore presents itself as the end of that
disposition or arrangement. Sometimes, however, there is an outward
teleology, a relation of unorganised to organised nature in general, or
of particular parts of organised nature to each other, which makes the
maintenance of the whole of organised nature, or of the particular animal
species, possible, and therefore presents itself to our judgment as the
means to this end.

Inner teleology is connected with the scheme of our work in the
following way. If, in accordance with what has been said, all variations
of form in nature, and all multiplicity of individuals, belong not to the
will itself, but merely to its objectivity and the form of this
objectivity, it necessarily follows that the will is indivisible and is
present as a whole in every manifestation, although the grades of its
objectification, the (Platonic) Ideas, are very different from each other.
We may, for the sake of simplicity, regard these different Ideas as in
themselves individual and simple acts of the will, in which it expresses
its nature more or less. Individuals, however, are again manifestations of
the Ideas, thus of these acts, in time, space, and multiplicity. Now, in
the lowest grades of objectivity, such an act (or an Idea) retains its
unity in the manifestation; while, in order to appear in higher grades, it
requires a whole series of conditions and developments in time, which only
collectively express its nature completely. Thus, for example the Idea
that reveals itself in any general force of nature has always one single
expression, although it presents itself differently according to the
external relations that are present: otherwise its identity could not be
proved, for this is done by abstracting the diversity that arises merely
from external relations. In the same way the crystal has only one
manifestation of life, crystallisation, which afterwards has its fully
adequate and exhaustive expression in the rigid form, the corpse of that
momentary life. The plant, however, does not express the Idea, whose
phenomenon it is, at once and through a single manifestation, but in a
succession of developments of its organs in time. The animal not only
develops its organism in the same manner, in a succession of forms which
are often very different (metamorphosis), but this form itself, although
it is already objectivity of will at this grade, does not attain to a full
expression of its Idea. This expression must be completed through the
actions of the animal, in which its empirical character, common to the
whole species, manifests itself, and only then does it become the full
revelation of the Idea, a revelation which presupposes the particular
organism as its first condition. In the case of man, the empirical
character is peculiar to every individual (indeed, as we shall see in the
Fourth Book, even to the extent of supplanting entirely the character of
the species, through the self-surrender of the whole will). That which is
known as the empirical character, through the necessary development in
time, and the division into particular actions that is conditioned by it,
is, when we abstract from this temporal form of the manifestation the
intelligible character, according to the expression of Kant, who shows
his undying merit especially in establishing this distinction and
explaining the relation between freedom and necessity, i.e., between the
will as thing-in-itself and its manifestations in time.(38) Thus the
intelligible character coincides with the Idea, or, more accurately, with
the original act of will which reveals itself in it. So far then, not only
the empirical character of every man, but also that of every species of
animal and plant, and even of every original force of unorganised nature,
is to be regarded as the manifestation of an intelligible character, that
is, of a timeless, indivisible act of will. I should like here to draw
attention in passing to the naïveté with which every plant expresses and
lays open its whole character in its mere form, reveals its whole being
and will. This is why the physiognomy of plants is so interesting; while
in order to know an animal in its Idea, it is necessary to observe the
course of its action. As for man, he must be fully investigated and
tested, for reason makes him capable of a high degree of dissimulation.
The beast is as much more naïve than the man as the plant is more naïve
than the beast. In the beast we see the will to live more naked, as it
were, than in the man, in whom it is clothed with so much knowledge, and
is, moreover, so veiled through the capacity for dissimulation, that it is
almost only by chance, and here and there, that its true nature becomes
apparent. In the plant it shows itself quite naked, but also much weaker,
as mere blind striving for existence without end or aim. For the plant
reveals its whole being at the first glance, and with complete innocence,
which does not suffer from the fact that it carries its organs of
generation exposed to view on its upper surface, though in all animals
they have been assigned to the most hidden part. This innocence of the
plant results from its complete want of knowledge. Guilt does not lie in
willing, but in willing with knowledge. Every plant speaks to us first of
all of its home, of the climate, and the nature of the ground in which it
has grown. Therefore, even those who have had little practice easily tell
whether an exotic plant belongs to the tropical or the temperate zone, and
whether it grows in water, in marshes, on mountain, or on moorland.
Besides this, however, every plant expresses the special will of its
species, and says something that cannot be uttered in any other tongue.
But we must now apply what has been said to the teleological consideration
of the organism, so far as it concerns its inner design. If in unorganised
nature the Idea, which is everywhere to be regarded as a single act of
will, reveals itself also in a single manifestation which is always the
same, and thus one may say that here the empirical character directly
partakes of the unity of the intelligible, coincides, as it were, with it,
so that no inner design can show itself here; if, on the contrary, all
organisms express their Ideas through a series of successive developments,
conditioned by a multiplicity of co-existing parts, and thus only the sum
of the manifestations of the empirical character collectively constitute
the expression of the intelligible character; this necessary co-existence
of the parts and succession of the stages of development does not destroy
the unity of the appearing Idea, the act of will which expresses itself;
nay, rather this unity finds its expression in the necessary relation and
connection of the parts and stages of development with each other, in
accordance with the law of causality. Since it is the will which is one,
indivisible, and therefore entirely in harmony with itself, that reveals
itself in the whole Idea as in act, its manifestation, although broken up
into a number of different parts and conditions, must yet show this unity
again in the thorough agreement of all of these. This is effected by a
necessary relation and dependence of all the parts upon each other, by
means of which the unity of the Idea is re-established in the
manifestation. In accordance with this, we now recognise these different
parts and functions of the organism as related to each other reciprocally
as means and end, but the organism itself as the final end of all.
Consequently, neither the breaking up of the Idea, which in itself is
simple, into the multiplicity of the parts and conditions of the organism,
on the one hand, nor, on the other hand, the re-establishment of its unity
through the necessary connection of the parts and functions which arises
from the fact that they are the cause and effect, the means and end, of
each other, is peculiar and essential to the appearing will as such, to
the thing-in-itself, but only to its manifestation in space, time, and
causality (mere modes of the principle of sufficient reason, the form of
the phenomenon). They belong to the world as idea, not to the world as
will; they belong to the way in which the will becomes object, i.e.,
idea at this grade of its objectivity. Every one who has grasped the
meaning of this discussion—a discussion which is perhaps somewhat
difficult—will now fully understand the doctrine of Kant, which follows
from it, that both the design of organised and the conformity to law of
unorganised nature are only introduced by our understanding, and therefore
both belong only to the phenomenon, not to the thing-in-itself. The
surprise, which was referred to above, at the infallible constancy of the
conformity to law of unorganised nature, is essentially the same as the
surprise that is excited by design in organised nature; for in both cases
what we wonder at is only the sight of the original unity of the Idea,
which, for the phenomenon, has assumed the form of multiplicity and
diversity.(39)

As regards the second kind of teleology, according to the division made
above, the outer design, which shows itself, not in the inner economy of
the organisms, but in the support and assistance they receive from
without, both from unorganised nature and from each other; its general
explanation is to be found in the exposition we have just given. For the
whole world, with all its phenomena, is the objectivity of the one
indivisible will, the Idea, which is related to all other Ideas as harmony
is related to the single voice. Therefore that unity of the will must show
itself also in the agreement of all its manifestations. But we can very
much increase the clearness of this insight if we go somewhat more closely
into the manifestations of that outer teleology and agreement of the
different parts of nature with each other, an inquiry which will also
throw some light on the foregoing exposition. We shall best attain this
end by considering the following analogy.

The character of each individual man, so far as it is thoroughly
individual, and not entirely included in that of the species, may be
regarded as a special Idea, corresponding to a special act of the
objectification of will. This act itself would then be his intelligible
character, and his empirical character would be the manifestation of it.
The empirical character is entirely determined through the intelligible,
which is without ground, i.e., as thing-in-itself is not subordinated to
the principle of sufficient reason (the form of the phenomenon). The
empirical character must in the course of life afford us the express image
of the intelligible, and can only become what the nature of the latter
demands. But this property extends only to the essential, not to the
unessential in the course of life to which it applies. To this unessential
belong the detailed events and actions which are the material in which the
empirical character shows itself. These are determined by outward
circumstances, which present the motives upon which the character reacts
according to its nature; and as they may be very different, the outward
form of the manifestation of the empirical character, that is, the
definite actual or historical form of the course of life, will have to
accommodate itself to their influence. Now this form may be very
different, although what is essential to the manifestation, its content,
remains the same. Thus, for example it is immaterial whether a man plays
for nuts or for crowns; but whether a man cheats or plays fairly, that is
the real matter; the latter is determined by the intelligible character,
the former by outward circumstances. As the same theme may be expressed in
a hundred different variations, so the same character may be expressed in
a hundred very different lives. But various as the outward influence may
be, the empirical character which expresses itself in the course of life
must yet, whatever form it takes, accurately objectify the intelligible
character, for the latter adapts its objectification to the given material
of actual circumstances. We have now to assume something analogous to the
influence of outward circumstances upon the life that is determined in
essential matters by the character, if we desire to understand how the
will, in the original act of its objectification, determines the various
Ideas in which it objectifies itself, that is, the different forms of
natural existence of every kind, among which it distributes its
objectification, and which must therefore necessarily have a relation to
each other in the manifestation. We must assume that between all these
manifestations of the one will there existed a universal and reciprocal
adaptation and accommodation of themselves to each other, by which,
however, as we shall soon see more clearly, all time-determination is to
be excluded, for the Idea lies outside time. In accordance with this,
every manifestation must have adapted itself to the surroundings into
which it entered, and these again must have adapted themselves to it,
although it occupied a much later position in time; and we see this
consensus naturæ everywhere. Every plant is therefore adapted to its
soil and climate, every animal to its element and the prey that will be
its food, and is also in some way protected, to a certain extent, against
its natural enemy: the eye is adapted to the light and its refrangibility,
the lungs and the blood to the air, the air-bladder of fish to water, the
eye of the seal to the change of the medium in which it must see, the
water-pouch in the stomach of the camel to the drought of the African
deserts, the sail of the nautilus to the wind that is to drive its little
bark, and so on down to the most special and astonishing outward
adaptations.(40) We must abstract however here from all temporal
relations, for these can only concern the manifestation of the Idea, not
the Idea itself. Accordingly this kind of explanation must also be used
retrospectively, and we must not merely admit that every species
accommodated itself to the given environment, but also that this
environment itself, which preceded it in time, had just as much regard for
the being that would some time come into it. For it is one and the same
will that objectifies itself in the whole world; it knows no time, for
this form of the principle of sufficient reason does not belong to it, nor
to its original objectivity, the Ideas, but only to the way in which these
are known by the individuals who themselves are transitory, i.e., to the
manifestation of the Ideas. Thus, time has no significance for our present
examination of the manner in which the objectification of the will
distributes itself among the Ideas, and the Ideas whose manifestations
entered into the course of time earlier, according to the law of
causality, to which as phenomena they are subject, have no advantage over
those whose manifestation entered later; nay rather, these last are the
completest objectifications of the will, to which the earlier
manifestations must adapt themselves just as much as they must adapt
themselves to the earlier. Thus the course of the planets, the tendency to
the ellipse, the rotation of the earth, the division of land and sea, the
atmosphere, light, warmth, and all such phenomena, which are in nature
what bass is in harmony, adapted themselves in anticipation of the coming
species of living creatures of which they were to become the supporter and
sustainer. In the same way the ground adapted itself to the nutrition of
plants, plants adapted themselves to the nutrition of animals, animals to
that of other animals, and conversely they all adapted themselves to the
nutrition of the ground. All the parts of nature correspond to each other,
for it is one will that appears in them all, but the course of time is
quite foreign to its original and only adequate objectification (this
expression will be explained in the following book), the Ideas. Even now,
when the species have only to sustain themselves, no longer to come into
existence, we see here and there some such forethought of nature extending
to the future, and abstracting as it were from the process of time, a
self-adaptation of what is to what is yet to come. The bird builds the
nest for the young which it does not yet know; the beaver constructs a dam
the object of which is unknown to it; ants, marmots, and bees lay in
provision for the winter they have never experienced; the spider and the
ant-lion make snares, as if with deliberate cunning, for future unknown
prey; insects deposit their eggs where the coming brood finds future
nourishment. In the spring-time the female flower of the diœcian
valisneria unwinds the spirals of its stalk, by which till now it was held
at the bottom of the water, and thus rises to the surface. Just then the
male flower, which grows on a short stalk from the bottom, breaks away,
and so, at the sacrifice of its life, reaches the surface, where it swims
about in search of the female. The latter is fructified, and then draws
itself down again to the bottom by contracting its spirals, and there the
fruit grows.(41) I must again refer here to the larva of the male
stag-beetle, which makes the hole in the wood for its metamorphosis as big
again as the female does, in order to have room for its future horns. The
instinct of animals in general gives us the best illustration of what
remains of teleology in nature. For as instinct is an action, like that
which is guided by the conception of an end, and yet is entirely without
this; so all construction of nature resembles that which is guided by the
conception of an end, and yet is entirely without it. For in the outer as
in the inner teleology of nature, what we are obliged to think as means
and end is, in every case, the manifestation of the unity of the one will
so thoroughly agreeing with itself, which has assumed multiplicity in
space and time for our manner of knowing.

The reciprocal adaptation and self-accommodation of phenomena that springs
from this unity cannot, however, annul the inner contradiction which
appears in the universal conflict of nature described above, and which is
essential to the will. That harmony goes only so far as to render possible
the duration of the world and the different kinds of existences in it,
which without it would long since have perished. Therefore it only extends
to the continuance of the species, and the general conditions of life, but
not to that of the individual. If, then, by reason of that harmony and
accommodation, the species in organised nature and the universal
forces in unorganised nature continue to exist beside each other, and
indeed support each other reciprocally, on the other hand, the inner
contradiction of the will which objectifies itself in all these ideas
shows itself in the ceaseless internecine war of the individuals of
these species, and in the constant struggle of the manifestations of
these natural forces with each other, as we pointed out above. The scene
and the object of this conflict is matter, which they try to wrest from
each other, and also space and time, the combination of which through the
form of causality is, in fact, matter, as was explained in the First
Book.(42)

§ 29. I here conclude the second principal division of my exposition, in
the hope that, so far as is possible in the case of an entirely new
thought, which cannot be quite free from traces of the individuality in
which it originated, I have succeeded in conveying to the reader the
complete certainty that this world in which we live and have our being is
in its whole nature through and through will, and at the same time
through and through idea: that this idea, as such, already presupposes a
form, object and subject, is therefore relative; and if we ask what
remains if we take away this form, and all those forms which are
subordinate to it, and which express the principle of sufficient reason,
the answer must be that as something toto genere different from idea,
this can be nothing but will, which is thus properly the
thing-in-itself. Every one finds that he himself is this will, in which
the real nature of the world consists, and he also finds that he is the
knowing subject, whose idea the whole world is, the world which exists
only in relation to his consciousness, as its necessary supporter. Every
one is thus himself in a double aspect the whole world, the microcosm;
finds both sides whole and complete in himself. And what he thus
recognises as his own real being also exhausts the being of the whole
world—the macrocosm; thus the world, like man, is through and through
will, and through and through idea, and nothing more than this. So we
see the philosophy of Thales, which concerned the macrocosm, unite at this
point with that of Socrates, which dealt with the microcosm, for the
object of both is found to be the same. But all the knowledge that has
been communicated in the two first books will gain greater completeness,
and consequently greater certainty, from the two following books, in which
I hope that several questions that have more or less distinctly arisen in
the course of our work will also be sufficiently answered.

In the meantime one such question may be more particularly considered,
for it can only properly arise so long as one has not fully penetrated the
meaning of the foregoing exposition, and may so far serve as an
illustration of it. It is this: Every will is a will towards something,
has an object, an end of its willing; what then is the final end, or
towards what is that will striving that is exhibited to us as the
being-in-itself of the world? This question rests, like so many others,
upon the confusion of the thing-in-itself with the manifestation. The
principle of sufficient reason, of which the law of motivation is also a
form, extends only to the latter, not to the former. It is only of
phenomena, of individual things, that a ground can be given, never of the
will itself, nor of the Idea in which it adequately objectifies itself. So
then of every particular movement or change of any kind in nature, a cause
is to be sought, that is, a condition that of necessity produced it, but
never of the natural force itself which is revealed in this and
innumerable similar phenomena; and it is therefore simple
misunderstanding, arising from want of consideration, to ask for a cause
of gravity, electricity, and so on. Only if one had somehow shown that
gravity and electricity were not original special forces of nature, but
only the manifestations of a more general force already known, would it be
allowable to ask for the cause which made this force produce the phenomena
of gravity or of electricity here. All this has been explained at length
above. In the same way every particular act of will of a knowing
individual (which is itself only a manifestation of will as the
thing-in-itself) has necessarily a motive without which that act would
never have occurred; but just as material causes contain merely the
determination that at this time, in this place, and in this matter, a
manifestation of this or that natural force must take place, so the motive
determines only the act of will of a knowing being, at this time, in this
place, and under these circumstances, as a particular act, but by no means
determines that that being wills in general or wills in this manner; this
is the expression of his intelligible character, which, as will itself,
the thing-in-itself, is without ground, for it lies outside the province
of the principle of sufficient reason. Therefore every man has permanent
aims and motives by which he guides his conduct, and he can always give an
account of his particular actions; but if he were asked why he wills at
all, or why in general he wills to exist, he would have no answer, and the
question would indeed seem to him meaningless; and this would be just the
expression of his consciousness that he himself is nothing but will, whose
willing stands by itself and requires more particular determination by
motives only in its individual acts at each point of time.

In fact, freedom from all aim, from all limits, belongs to the nature of
the will, which is an endless striving. This was already touched on above
in the reference to centrifugal force. It also discloses itself in its
simplest form in the lowest grade of the objectification of will, in
gravitation, which we see constantly exerting itself, though a final goal
is obviously impossible for it. For if, according to its will, all
existing matter were collected in one mass, yet within this mass gravity,
ever striving towards the centre, would still wage war with
impenetrability as rigidity or elasticity. The tendency of matter can
therefore only be confined, never completed or appeased. But this is
precisely the case with all tendencies of all phenomena of will. Every
attained end is also the beginning of a new course, and so on ad
infinitum. The plant raises its manifestation from the seed through the
stem and the leaf to the blossom and the fruit, which again is the
beginning of a new seed, a new individual, that runs through the old
course, and so on through endless time. Such also is the life of the
animal; procreation is its highest point, and after attaining to it, the
life of the first individual quickly or slowly sinks, while a new life
ensures to nature the endurance of the species and repeats the same
phenomena. Indeed, the constant renewal of the matter of every organism is
also to be regarded as merely the manifestation of this continual pressure
and change, and physiologists are now ceasing to hold that it is the
necessary reparation of the matter wasted in motion, for the possible
wearing out of the machine can by no means be equivalent to the support it
is constantly receiving through nourishment. Eternal becoming, endless
flux, characterises the revelation of the inner nature of will. Finally,
the same thing shows itself in human endeavours and desires, which always
delude us by presenting their satisfaction as the final end of will. As
soon as we attain to them they no longer appear the same, and therefore
they soon grow stale, are forgotten, and though not openly disowned, are
yet always thrown aside as vanished illusions. We are fortunate enough if
there still remains something to wish for and to strive after, that the
game may be kept up of constant transition from desire to satisfaction,
and from satisfaction to a new desire, the rapid course of which is called
happiness, and the slow course sorrow, and does not sink into that
stagnation that shows itself in fearful ennui that paralyses life, vain
yearning without a definite object, deadening languor. According to all
this, when the will is enlightened by knowledge, it always knows what it
wills now and here, never what it wills in general; every particular act
of will has its end, the whole will has none; just as every particular
phenomenon of nature is determined by a sufficient cause so far as
concerns its appearance in this place at this time, but the force which
manifests itself in it has no general cause, for it belongs to the
thing-in-itself, to the groundless will. The single example of
self-knowledge of the will as a whole is the idea as a whole, the whole
world of perception. It is the objectification, the revelation, the mirror
of the will. What the will expresses in it will be the subject of our
further consideration.(43)
