§ 30. In the First Book the world was explained as mere idea, object for
a subject. In the Second Book we considered it from its other side, and
found that in this aspect it is will, which proved to be simply that
which this world is besides being idea. In accordance with this knowledge
we called the world as idea, both as a whole and in its parts, the
objectification of will, which therefore means the will become object,
i.e., idea. Further, we remember that this objectification of will was
found to have many definite grades, in which, with gradually increasing
distinctness and completeness, the nature of will appears in the idea,
that is to say, presents itself as object. In these grades we already
recognised the Platonic Ideas, for the grades are just the determined
species, or the original unchanging forms and qualities of all natural
bodies, both organised and unorganised, and also the general forces which
reveal themselves according to natural laws. These Ideas, then, as a whole
express themselves in innumerable individuals and particulars, and are
related to these as archetypes to their copies. The multiplicity of such
individuals is only conceivable through time and space, their appearing
and passing away through causality, and in all these forms we recognise
merely the different modes of the principle of sufficient reason, which is
the ultimate principle of all that is finite, of all individual existence,
and the universal form of the idea as it appears in the knowledge of the
individual as such. The Platonic Idea, on the other hand, does not come
under this principle, and has therefore neither multiplicity nor change.
While the individuals in which it expresses itself are innumerable, and
unceasingly come into being and pass away, it remains unchanged as one and
the same, and the principle of sufficient reason has for it no meaning.
As, however, this is the form under which all knowledge of the subject
comes, so far as the subject knows as an individual, the Ideas lie quite
outside the sphere of its knowledge. If, therefore, the Ideas are to
become objects of knowledge, this can only happen by transcending the
individuality of the knowing subject. The more exact and detailed
explanation of this is what will now occupy our attention.

§ 31. First, however, the following very essential remark. I hope that in
the preceding book I have succeeded in producing the conviction that what
is called in the Kantian philosophy the thing-in-itself, and appears
there as so significant, and yet so obscure and paradoxical a doctrine,
and especially on account of the manner in which Kant introduced it as an
inference from the caused to the cause, was considered a stumbling-stone,
and, in fact, the weak side of his philosophy,—that this, I say, if it is
reached by the entirely different way by which we have arrived at it, is
nothing but the will when the sphere of that conception is extended and
defined in the way I have shown. I hope, further, that after what has been
said there will be no hesitation in recognising the definite grades of the
objectification of the will, which is the inner reality of the world, to
be what Plato called the eternal Ideas or unchangeable forms (ειδῆ); a
doctrine which is regarded as the principal, but at the same time the most
obscure and paradoxical dogma of his system, and has been the subject of
reflection and controversy of ridicule and of reverence to so many and
such differently endowed minds in the course of many centuries.

If now the will is for us the thing-in-itself, and the Idea is the
immediate objectivity of that will at a definite grade, we find that
Kant’s thing-in-itself, and Plato’s Idea, which to him is the only οντως
ον, these two great obscure paradoxes of the two greatest philosophers of
the West are not indeed identical, but yet very closely related, and only
distinguished by a single circumstance. The purport of these two great
paradoxes, with all inner harmony and relationship, is yet so very
different on account of the remarkable diversity of the individuality of
their authors, that they are the best commentary on each other, for they
are like two entirely different roads that conduct us to the same goal.
This is easily made clear. What Kant says is in substance this:—“Time,
space, and causality are not determinations of the thing-in-itself, but
belong only to its phenomenal existence, for they are nothing but the
forms of our knowledge. Since, however, all multiplicity, and all coming
into being and passing away, are only possible through time, space, and
causality, it follows that they also belong only to the phenomenon, not to
the thing-in-itself. But as our knowledge is conditioned by these forms,
the whole of experience is only knowledge of the phenomenon, not of the
thing-in-itself; therefore its laws cannot be made valid for the
thing-in-itself. This extends even to our own ego, and we know it only
as phenomenon, and not according to what it may be in itself.” This is the
meaning and content of the doctrine of Kant in the important respect we
are considering. What Plato says is this:—“The things of this world which
our senses perceive have no true being; they always become, they never
are: they have only a relative being; they all exist merely in and
through their relations to each other; their whole being may, therefore,
quite as well be called a non-being. They are consequently not objects of
a true knowledge (επιστημη), for such a knowledge can only be of what
exists for itself, and always in the same way; they, on the contrary, are
only the objects of an opinion based on sensation (δοξα μετ᾽ αισθησεως
αλογου). So long as we are confined to the perception of these, we are
like men who sit in a dark cave, bound so fast that they cannot turn their
heads, and who see nothing but the shadows of real things which pass
between them and a fire burning behind them, the light of which casts the
shadows on the wall opposite them; and even of themselves and of each
other they see only the shadows on the wall. Their wisdom would thus
consist in predicting the order of the shadows learned from experience.
The real archetypes, on the other hand, to which these shadows correspond,
the eternal Ideas, the original forms of all things, can alone be said to
have true being (οντως ον), because they always are, but never become nor
pass away. To them belongs no multiplicity; for each of them is
according to its nature only one, for it is the archetype itself, of which
all particular transitory things of the same kind which are named after it
are copies or shadows. They have also no coming into being nor passing
away, for they are truly being, never becoming nor vanishing, like their
fleeting shadows. (It is necessarily presupposed, however, in these two
negative definitions, that time, space, and causality have no significance
or validity for these Ideas, and that they do not exist in them.) Of these
only can there be true knowledge, for the object of such knowledge can
only be that which always and in every respect (thus in-itself) is; not
that which is and again is not, according as we look at it.” This is
Plato’s doctrine. It is clear, and requires no further proof that the
inner meaning of both doctrines is entirely the same; that both explain
the visible world as a manifestation, which in itself is nothing, and
which only has meaning and a borrowed reality through that which expresses
itself in it (in the one case the thing-in-itself, in the other the Idea).
To this last, which has true being, all the forms of that phenomenal
existence, even the most universal and essential, are, according to both
doctrines, entirely foreign. In order to disown these forms Kant has
directly expressed them even in abstract terms, and distinctly refused
time, space, and causality as mere forms of the phenomenon to the
thing-in-itself. Plato, on the other hand, did not attain to the fullest
expression, and has only distinctly refused these forms to his Ideas in
that he denies of the Ideas what is only possible through these forms,
multiplicity of similar things, coming into being and passing away. Though
it is perhaps superfluous, I should like to illustrate this remarkable and
important agreement by an example. There stands before us, let us suppose,
an animal in the full activity of life. Plato would say, “This animal has
no true existence, but merely an apparent existence, a constant becoming,
a relative existence which may just as well be called non-being as being.
Only the Idea which expresses itself in that animal is truly ‘being,’ or
the animal in-itself (αυτο το θηριον), which is dependent upon nothing,
but is in and for itself (καθ᾽ ἑαυτο, αει ὡς αυτως); it has not become, it
will not end, but always is in the same way (αει ον, και μηδεποτε ουτε
γυγνομενον ουτε απολλυμενον). If now we recognise its Idea in this animal,
it is all one and of no importance whether we have this animal now before
us or its progenitor of a thousand years ago, whether it is here or in a
distant land, whether it presents itself in this or that manner, position,
or action; whether, lastly, it is this or any other individual of the same
species; all this is nothing, and only concerns the phenomenon; the Idea
of the animal alone has true being, and is the object of real knowledge.”
So Plato; Kant would say something of this kind, “This animal is a
phenomenon in time, space, and causality, which are collectively the
conditions a priori of the possibility of experience, lying in our
faculty of knowledge, not determinations of the thing-in-itself. Therefore
this animal as we perceive it at this definite point of time, in this
particular place, as an individual in the connection of experience
(i.e., in the chain of causes and effects), which has come into being,
and will just as necessarily pass away, is not a thing-in-itself, but a
phenomenon which only exists in relation to our knowledge. To know it as
what it may be in itself, that is to say, independent of all the
determinations which lie in time, space, and causality, would demand
another kind of knowledge than that which is possible for us through the
senses and the understanding.”

In order to bring Kant’s mode of expression nearer the Platonic, we might
say: Time, space, and causality are that arrangement of our intellect by
virtue of which the one being of each kind which alone really is,
manifests itself to us as a multiplicity of similar beings, constantly
appearing and disappearing in endless succession. The apprehension of
things by means of and in accordance with this arrangement is immanent
knowledge; that, on the other hand, which is conscious of the true state
of the case, is transcendental knowledge. The latter is obtained in
abstracto through the criticism of pure reason, but in exceptional cases
it may also appear intuitively. This last is an addition of my own, which
I am endeavouring in this Third Book to explain.

If the doctrine of Kant had ever been properly understood and grasped, and
since Kant’s time that of Plato, if men had truly and earnestly reflected
on the inner meaning and content of the teaching of these two great
masters, instead of involving themselves in the technicalities of the one
and writing parodies of the style of the other, they could not have failed
to discern long ago to what an extent these two great philosophers agree,
and that the true meaning, the aim of both systems, is the same. Not only
would they have refrained from constantly comparing Plato to Leibnitz, on
whom his spirit certainly did not rest, or indeed to a well-known
gentleman who is still alive,(44) as if they wanted to mock the manes of
the great thinker of the past; but they would have advanced much farther
in general, or rather they would not have fallen so disgracefully far
behind as they have in the last forty years. They would not have let
themselves be led by the nose, to-day by one vain boaster and to-morrow by
another, nor would they have opened the nineteenth century, which promised
so much in Germany, with the philosophical farces that were performed over
the grave of Kant (as the ancients sometimes did at the funeral obsequies
of their dead), and which deservedly called forth the derision of other
nations, for such things least become the earnest and strait-laced German.
But so small is the chosen public of true philosophers, that even students
who understand are but scantily brought them by the centuries—Εισι δη
ναρθηκοφοροι μεν πολλοι, βακχοι δε γε παυροι (Thyrsigeri quidem multi,
Baachi vero pauci). Ἡ ατιμια φιλοσοφιᾳ δια ταυτα προσπεπτωκεν, ὁτι ου κατ
αξιαν αυτης ἁπτονται; ου γαρ νοθους εδει ἁπτεσθαι, αλλα γνησιους (Eam ob
rem philosophia in infamiam incidit, quad non pro dignitate ipsam
attingunt: neque enim a spuriis, sad a legitimis erat
attrectanda).—Plato.

Men followed the words,—such words as “a priori ideas,” “forms of
perception and thought existing in consciousness independently of
experience,” “fundamental conceptions of the pure understanding,” &c.,
&c.,—and asked whether Plato’s Ideas, which were also original
conceptions, and besides this were supposed to be reminiscences of a
perception before life of the truly real things, were in some way the same
as Kant’s forms of perception and thought, which lie a priori in our
consciousness. On account of some slight resemblance in the expression of
these two entirely different doctrines, the Kantian doctrine of the forms
which limit the knowledge of the individual to the phenomenon, and the
Platonic doctrine of Ideas, the knowledge of which these very forms
expressly deny, these so far diametrically opposed doctrines were
carefully compared, and men deliberated and disputed as to whether they
were identical, found at last that they were not the same, and concluded
that Plato’s doctrine of Ideas and Kant’s “Critique of Reason” had nothing
in common. But enough of this.(45)

§ 32. It follows from our consideration of the subject, that, for us, Idea
and thing-in-itself are not entirely one and the same, in spite of the
inner agreement between Kant and Plato, and the identity of the aim they
had before them, or the conception of the world which roused them and led
them to philosophise. The Idea is for us rather the direct, and therefore
adequate, objectivity of the thing-in-itself, which is, however, itself
the will—the will as not yet objectified, not yet become idea. For the
thing-in-itself must, even according to Kant, be free from all the forms
connected with knowing as such; and it is merely an error on his part (as
is shown in the Appendix) that he did not count among these forms, before
all others, that of being object for a subject, for it is the first and
most universal form of all phenomena, i.e., of all idea; he should
therefore have distinctly denied objective existence to his
thing-in-itself, which would have saved him from a great inconsistency
that was soon discovered. The Platonic Idea, on the other hand, is
necessarily object, something known, an idea, and in that respect is
different from the thing-in-itself, but in that respect only. It has
merely laid aside the subordinate forms of the phenomenon, all of which we
include in the principle of sufficient reason, or rather it has not yet
assumed them; but it has retained the first and most universal form, that
of the idea in general, the form of being object for a subject. It is the
forms which are subordinate to this (whose general expression is the
principle of sufficient reason) that multiply the Idea in particular
transitory individuals, whose number is a matter of complete indifference
to the Idea. The principle of sufficient reason is thus again the form
into which the Idea enters when it appears in the knowledge of the subject
as individual. The particular thing that manifests itself in accordance
with the principle of sufficient reason is thus only an indirect
objectification of the thing-in-itself (which is the will), for between it
and the thing-in-itself stands the Idea as the only direct objectivity of
the will, because it has assumed none of the special forms of knowledge as
such, except that of the idea in general, i.e., the form of being object
for a subject. Therefore it alone is the most adequate objectivity of
the will or thing-in-itself which is possible; indeed it is the whole
thing-in-itself, only under the form of the idea; and here lies the ground
of the great agreement between Plato and Kant, although, in strict
accuracy, that of which they speak is not the same. But the particular
things are no really adequate objectivity of the will, for in them it is
obscured by those forms whose general expression is the principle of
sufficient reason, but which are conditions of the knowledge which belongs
to the individual as such. If it is allowable to draw conclusions from an
impossible presupposition, we would, in fact, no longer know particular
things, nor events, nor change, nor multiplicity, but would comprehend
only Ideas,—only the grades of the objectification of that one will, of
the thing-in-itself, in pure unclouded knowledge. Consequently our world
would be a nunc stans, if it were not that, as knowing subjects, we are
also individuals, i.e., our perceptions come to us through the medium of
a body, from the affections of which they proceed, and which is itself
only concrete willing, objectivity of the will, and thus is an object
among objects, and as such comes into the knowing consciousness in the
only way in which an object can, through the forms of the principle of
sufficient reason, and consequently already presupposes, and therefore
brings in, time, and all other forms which that principle expresses. Time
is only the broken and piecemeal view which the individual being has of
the Ideas, which are outside time, and consequently eternal. Therefore
Plato says time is the moving picture of eternity: αιωνος εικων κινητη ὁ
χρονος.(46)

§ 33. Since now, as individuals, we have no other knowledge than that
which is subject to the principle of sufficient reason, and this form of
knowledge excludes the Ideas, it is certain that if it is possible for us
to raise ourselves from the knowledge of particular things to that of the
Ideas, this can only happen by an alteration taking place in the subject
which is analogous and corresponds to the great change of the whole nature
of the object, and by virtue of which the subject, so far as it knows an
Idea, is no more individual.

It will be remembered from the preceding book that knowledge in general
belongs to the objectification of will at its higher grades, and
sensibility, nerves, and brain, just like the other parts of the organised
being, are the expression of the will at this stage of its objectivity,
and therefore the idea which appears through them is also in the same way
bound to the service of will as a means (μηχανη) for the attainment of its
now complicated (πολυτελεστερα) aims for sustaining a being of manifold
requirements. Thus originally and according to its nature, knowledge is
completely subject to the will, and, like the immediate object, which, by
means of the application of the law of causality, is its starting-point,
all knowledge which proceeds in accordance with the principle of
sufficient reason remains in a closer or more distant relation to the
will. For the individual finds his body as an object among objects, to all
of which it is related and connected according to the principle of
sufficient reason. Thus all investigations of these relations and
connections lead back to his body, and consequently to his will. Since it
is the principle of sufficient reason which places the objects in this
relation to the body, and, through it, to the will, the one endeavour of
the knowledge which is subject to this principle will be to find out the
relations in which objects are placed to each other through this
principle, and thus to trace their innumerable connections in space, time,
and causality. For only through these is the object interesting to the
individual, i.e., related to the will. Therefore the knowledge which is
subject to the will knows nothing further of objects than their relations,
knows the objects only so far as they exist at this time, in this place,
under these circumstances, from these causes, and with these effects—in a
word, as particular things; and if all these relations were to be taken
away, the objects would also have disappeared for it, because it knew
nothing more about them. We must not disguise the fact that what the
sciences consider in things is also in reality nothing more than this;
their relations, the connections of time and space, the causes of natural
changes, the resemblance of forms, the motives of actions,—thus merely
relations. What distinguishes science from ordinary knowledge is merely
its systematic form, the facilitating of knowledge by the comprehension of
all particulars in the universal, by means of the subordination of
concepts, and the completeness of knowledge which is thereby attained. All
relation has itself only a relative existence; for example, all being in
time is also non-being; for time is only that by means of which opposite
determinations can belong to the same thing; therefore every phenomenon
which is in time again is not, for what separates its beginning from its
end is only time, which is essentially a fleeting, inconstant, and
relative thing, here called duration. But time is the most universal form
of all objects of the knowledge which is subject to the will, and the
prototype of its other forms.

Knowledge now, as a rule, remains always subordinate to the service of the
will, as indeed it originated for this service, and grew, so to speak, to
the will, as the head to the body. In the case of the brutes this
subjection of knowledge to the will can never be abolished. In the case of
men it can be abolished only in exceptional cases, which we shall
presently consider more closely. This distinction between man and brute is
outwardly expressed by the difference of the relation of the head to the
body. In the case of the lower brutes both are deformed: in all brutes the
head is directed towards the earth, where the objects of its will lie;
even in the higher species the head and the body are still far more one
than in the case of man, whose head seems freely set upon his body, as if
only carried by and not serving it. This human excellence is exhibited in
the highest degree by the Apollo of Belvedere; the head of the god of the
Muses, with eyes fixed on the far distance, stands so freely on his
shoulders that it seems wholly delivered from the body, and no more
subject to its cares.

§ 34. The transition which we have referred to as possible, but yet to be
regarded as only exceptional, from the common knowledge of particular
things to the knowledge of the Idea, takes place suddenly; for knowledge
breaks free from the service of the will, by the subject ceasing to be
merely individual, and thus becoming the pure will-less subject of
knowledge, which no longer traces relations in accordance with the
principle of sufficient reason, but rests in fixed contemplation of the
object presented to it, out of its connection with all others, and rises
into it.

A full explanation is necessary to make this clear, and the reader must
suspend his surprise for a while, till he has grasped the whole thought
expressed in this work, and then it will vanish of itself.

If, raised by the power of the mind, a man relinquishes the common way of
looking at things, gives up tracing, under the guidance of the forms of
the principle of sufficient reason, their relations to each other, the
final goal of which is always a relation to his own will; if he thus
ceases to consider the where, the when, the why, and the whither of
things, and looks simply and solely at the what; if, further, he does
not allow abstract thought, the concepts of the reason, to take possession
of his consciousness, but, instead of all this, gives the whole power of
his mind to perception, sinks himself entirely in this, and lets his whole
consciousness be filled with the quiet contemplation of the natural object
actually present, whether a landscape, a tree, a mountain, a building, or
whatever it may be; inasmuch as he loses himself in this object (to use
a pregnant German idiom), i.e., forgets even his individuality, his
will, and only continues to exist as the pure subject, the clear mirror of
the object, so that it is as if the object alone were there, without any
one to perceive it, and he can no longer separate the perceiver from the
perception, but both have become one, because the whole consciousness is
filled and occupied with one single sensuous picture; if thus the object
has to such an extent passed out of all relation to something outside it,
and the subject out of all relation to the will, then that which is so
known is no longer the particular thing as such; but it is the Idea, the
eternal form, the immediate objectivity of the will at this grade; and,
therefore, he who is sunk in this perception is no longer individual, for
in such perception the individual has lost himself; but he is pure,
will-less, painless, timeless subject of knowledge. This, which in
itself is so remarkable (which I well know confirms the saying that
originated with Thomas Paine, Du sublime au ridicule il n’y a qu’un
pas), will by degrees become clearer and less surprising from what
follows. It was this that was running in Spinoza’s mind when he wrote:
Meus æterna est, quatenus res sub æternitatis specie  concipit (Eth.
V. pr. 31, Schol.)(47) In such contemplation the particular thing becomes
at once the Idea of its species, and the perceiving individual becomes
pure subject of knowledge. The individual, as such, knows only
particular things; the pure subject of knowledge knows only Ideas. For the
individual is the subject of knowledge in its relation to a definite
particular manifestation of will, and in subjection to this. This
particular manifestation of will is, as such, subordinated to the
principle of sufficient reason in all its forms; therefore, all knowledge
which relates itself to it also follows the principle of sufficient
reason, and no other kind of knowledge is fitted to be of use to the will
but this, which always consists merely of relations to the object. The
knowing individual as such, and the particular things known by him, are
always in some place, at some time, and are links in the chain of causes
and effects. The pure subject of knowledge and his correlative, the Idea,
have passed out of all these forms of the principle of sufficient reason:
time, place, the individual that knows, and the individual that is known,
have for them no meaning. When an individual knower has raised himself in
the manner described to be pure subject of knowledge, and at the same time
has raised the observed object to the Platonic Idea, the world as idea
appears complete and pure, and the full objectification of the will takes
place, for the Platonic Idea alone is its adequate objectivity. The Idea
includes object and subject in like manner in itself, for they are its one
form; but in it they are absolutely of equal importance; for as the object
is here, as elsewhere, simply the idea of the subject, the subject, which
passes entirely into the perceived object has thus become this object
itself, for the whole consciousness is nothing but its perfectly distinct
picture. Now this consciousness constitutes the whole world as idea, for
one imagines the whole of the Platonic Ideas, or grades of the objectivity
of will, in their series passing through it. The particular things of all
time and space are nothing but Ideas multiplied through the principle of
sufficient reason (the form of the knowledge of the individual as such),
and thus obscured as regards their pure objectivity. When the Platonic
Idea appears, in it subject and object are no longer to be distinguished,
for the Platonic Idea, the adequate objectivity of will, the true world as
idea, arises only when the subject and object reciprocally fill and
penetrate each other completely; and in the same way the knowing and the
known individuals, as things in themselves, are not to be distinguished.
For if we look entirely away from the true world as idea, there remains
nothing but the world as will. The will is the “in-itself” of the
Platonic Idea, which fully objectifies it; it is also the “in-itself” of
the particular thing and of the individual that knows it, which objectify
it incompletely. As will, outside the idea and all its forms, it is one
and the same in the object contemplated and in the individual, who soars
aloft in this contemplation, and becomes conscious of himself as pure
subject. These two are, therefore, in themselves not different, for in
themselves they are will, which here knows itself; and multiplicity and
difference exist only as the way in which this knowledge comes to the
will, i.e., only in the phenomenon, on account of its form, the
principle of sufficient reason.

Now the known thing, without me as the subject of knowledge, is just as
little an object, and not mere will, blind effort, as without the object,
without the idea, I am a knowing subject and not mere blind will. This
will is in itself, i.e., outside the idea, one and the same with mine:
only in the world as idea, whose form is always at least that of subject
and object, we are separated as the known and the knowing individual. As
soon as knowledge, the world as idea, is abolished, there remains nothing
but mere will, blind effort. That it should receive objectivity, become
idea, supposes at once both subject and object; but that this should be
pure, complete, and adequate objectivity of the will, supposes the object
as Platonic Idea, free from the forms of the principle of sufficient
reason, and the subject as the pure subject of knowledge, free from
individuality and subjection to the will.

Whoever now, has, after the manner referred to, become so absorbed and
lost in the perception of nature that he only continues to exist as the
pure knowing subject, becomes in this way directly conscious that, as
such, he is the condition, that is, the supporter, of the world and all
objective existence; for this now shows itself as dependent upon his
existence. Thus he draws nature into himself, so that he sees it to be
merely an accident of his own being. In this sense Byron says—


    “Are not the mountains, waves, and skies, a part
      Of me and of my soul, as I of them?”


But how shall he who feels this, regard himself as absolutely transitory,
in contrast to imperishable nature? Such a man will rather be filled with
the consciousness, which the Upanishad of the Veda expresses: Hæ omnes
creaturæ in totum ego sum, et præter me aliud ens non est (Oupnek’hat, i.
122).(48)

§ 35. In order to gain a deeper insight into the nature of the world, it
is absolutely necessary that we should learn to distinguish the will as
thing-in-itself from its adequate objectivity, and also the different
grades in which this appears more and more distinctly and fully, i.e.,
the Ideas themselves, from the merely phenomenal existence of these Ideas
in the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, the restricted method
of knowledge of the individual. We shall then agree with Plato when he
attributes actual being only to the Ideas, and allows only an illusive,
dream-like existence to things in space and time, the real world for the
individual. Then we shall understand how one and the same Idea reveals
itself in so many phenomena, and presents its nature only bit by bit to
the individual, one side after another. Then we shall also distinguish the
Idea itself from the way in which its manifestation appears in the
observation of the individual, and recognise the former as essential and
the latter as unessential. Let us consider this with the help of examples
taken from the most insignificant things, and also from the greatest. When
the clouds move, the figures which they form are not essential, but
indifferent to them; but that as elastic vapour they are pressed together,
drifted along, spread out, or torn asunder by the force of the wind: this
is their nature, the essence of the forces which objectify themselves in
them, the Idea; their actual forms are only for the individual observer.
To the brook that flows over stones, the eddies, the waves, the
foam-flakes which it forms are indifferent and unessential; but that it
follows the attraction of gravity, and behaves as inelastic, perfectly
mobile, formless, transparent fluid: this is its nature; this, if known
through perception, is its Idea; these accidental forms are only for us
so long as we know as individuals. The ice on the window-pane forms itself
into crystals according to the laws of crystallisation, which reveal the
essence of the force of nature that appears here, exhibit the Idea; but
the trees and flowers which it traces on the pane are unessential, and are
only there for us. What appears in the clouds, the brook, and the crystal
is the weakest echo of that will which appears more fully in the plant,
more fully still in the beast, and most fully in man. But only the
essential in all these grades of its objectification constitutes the Idea;
on the other hand, its unfolding or development, because broken up in the
forms of the principle of sufficient reason into a multiplicity of
many-sided phenomena, is unessential to the Idea, lies merely in the kind
of knowledge that belongs to the individual and has reality only for this.
The same thing necessarily holds good of the unfolding of that Idea which
is the completest objectivity of will. Therefore, the history of the human
race, the throng of events, the change of times, the multifarious forms of
human life in different lands and countries, all this is only the
accidental form of the manifestation of the Idea, does not belong to the
Idea itself, in which alone lies the adequate objectivity of the will, but
only to the phenomenon which appears in the knowledge of the individual,
and is just as foreign, unessential, and indifferent to the Idea itself as
the figures which they assume are to the clouds, the form of its eddies
and foam-flakes to the brook, or its trees and flowers to the ice.

To him who has thoroughly grasped this, and can distinguish between the
will and the Idea, and between the Idea and its manifestation, the events
of the world will have significance only so far as they are the letters
out of which we may read the Idea of man, but not in and for themselves.
He will not believe with the vulgar that time may produce something
actually new and significant; that through it, or in it, something
absolutely real may attain to existence, or indeed that it itself as a
whole has beginning and end, plan and development, and in some way has for
its final aim the highest perfection (according to their conception) of
the last generation of man, whose life is a brief thirty years. Therefore
he will just as little, with Homer, people a whole Olympus with gods to
guide the events of time, as, with Ossian, he will take the forms of the
clouds for individual beings; for, as we have said, both have just as much
meaning as regards the Idea which appears in them. In the manifold forms
of human life and in the unceasing change of events, he will regard the
Idea only as the abiding and essential, in which the will to live has its
fullest objectivity, and which shows its different sides in the
capacities, the passions, the errors and the excellences of the human
race; in self-interest, hatred, love, fear, boldness, frivolity,
stupidity, slyness, wit, genius, and so forth, all of which crowding
together and combining in thousands of forms (individuals), continually
create the history of the great and the little world, in which it is all
the same whether they are set in motion by nuts or by crowns. Finally, he
will find that in the world it is the same as in the dramas of Gozzi, in
all of which the same persons appear, with like intention, and with a like
fate; the motives and incidents are certainly different in each piece, but
the spirit of the incidents is the same; the actors in one piece know
nothing of the incidents of another, although they performed in it
themselves; therefore, after all experience of former pieces, Pantaloon
has become no more agile or generous, Tartaglia no more conscientious,
Brighella no more courageous, and Columbine no more modest.

Suppose we were allowed for once a clearer glance into the kingdom of the
possible, and over the whole chain of causes and effects; if the
earth-spirit appeared and showed us in a picture all the greatest men,
enlighteners of the world, and heroes, that chance destroyed before they
were ripe for their work; then the great events that would have changed
the history of the world and brought in periods of the highest culture and
enlightenment, but which the blindest chance, the most insignificant
accident, hindered at the outset; lastly, the splendid powers of great
men, that would have enriched whole ages of the world, but which, either
misled by error or passion, or compelled by necessity, they squandered
uselessly on unworthy or unfruitful objects, or even wasted in play. If we
saw all this, we would shudder and lament at the thought of the lost
treasures of whole periods of the world. But the earth-spirit would smile
and say, “The source from which the individuals and their powers proceed
is inexhaustible and unending as time and space; for, like these forms of
all phenomena, they also are only phenomena, visibility of the will. No
finite measure can exhaust that infinite source; therefore an undiminished
eternity is always open for the return of any event or work that was
nipped in the bud. In this world of phenomena true loss is just as little
possible as true gain. The will alone is; it is the thing in-itself, and
the source of all these phenomena. Its self-knowledge and its assertion or
denial, which is then decided upon, is the only event in-itself.”(49)

§ 36. History follows the thread of events; it is pragmatic so far as it
deduces them in accordance with the law of motivation, a law that
determines the self-manifesting will wherever it is enlightened by
knowledge. At the lowest grades of its objectivity, where it still acts
without knowledge, natural science, in the form of etiology, treats of the
laws of the changes of its phenomena, and, in the form of morphology, of
what is permanent in them. This almost endless task is lightened by the
aid of concepts, which comprehend what is general in order that we may
deduce what is particular from it. Lastly, mathematics treats of the mere
forms, time and space, in which the Ideas, broken up into multiplicity,
appear for the knowledge of the subject as individual. All these, of which
the common name is science, proceed according to the principle of
sufficient reason in its different forms, and their theme is always the
phenomenon, its laws, connections, and the relations which result from
them. But what kind of knowledge is concerned with that which is outside
and independent of all relations, that which alone is really essential to
the world, the true content of its phenomena, that which is subject to no
change, and therefore is known with equal truth for all time, in a word,
the Ideas, which are the direct and adequate objectivity of the thing
in-itself, the will? We answer, Art, the work of genius. It repeats or
reproduces the eternal Ideas grasped through pure contemplation, the
essential and abiding in all the phenomena of the world; and according to
what the material is in which it reproduces, it is sculpture or painting,
poetry or music. Its one source is the knowledge of Ideas; its one aim the
communication of this knowledge. While science, following the unresting
and inconstant stream of the fourfold forms of reason and consequent, with
each end attained sees further, and can never reach a final goal nor
attain full satisfaction, any more than by running we can reach the place
where the clouds touch the horizon; art, on the contrary, is everywhere at
its goal. For it plucks the object of its contemplation out of the stream
of the world’s course, and has it isolated before it. And this particular
thing, which in that stream was a small perishing part, becomes to art the
representative of the whole, an equivalent of the endless multitude in
space and time. It therefore pauses at this particular thing; the course
of time stops; the relations vanish for it; only the essential, the Idea,
is its object. We may, therefore, accurately define it as the way of
viewing things independent of the principle of sufficient reason, in
opposition to the way of viewing them which proceeds in accordance with
that principle, and which is the method of experience and of science. This
last method of considering things may be compared to a line infinitely
extended in a horizontal direction, and the former to a vertical line
which cuts it at any point. The method of viewing things which proceeds in
accordance with the principle of sufficient reason is the rational method,
and it alone is valid and of use in practical life and in science. The
method which looks away from the content of this principle is the method
of genius, which is only valid and of use in art. The first is the method
of Aristotle; the second is, on the whole, that of Plato. The first is
like the mighty storm, that rushes along without beginning and without
aim, bending, agitating, and carrying away everything before it; the
second is like the silent sunbeam, that pierces through the storm quite
unaffected by it. The first is like the innumerable showering drops of the
waterfall, which, constantly changing, never rest for an instant; the
second is like the rainbow, quietly resting on this raging torrent. Only
through the pure contemplation described above, which ends entirely in the
object, can Ideas be comprehended; and the nature of genius consists in
pre-eminent capacity for such contemplation. Now, as this requires that a
man should entirely forget himself and the relations in which he stands,
genius is simply the completest objectivity, i.e., the objective
tendency of the mind, as opposed to the subjective, which is directed to
one’s own self—in other words, to the will. Thus genius is the faculty of
continuing in the state of pure perception, of losing oneself in
perception, and of enlisting in this service the knowledge which
originally existed only for the service of the will; that is to say,
genius is the power of leaving one’s own interests, wishes, and aims
entirely out of sight, thus of entirely renouncing one’s own personality
for a time, so as to remain pure knowing subject, clear vision of the
world; and this not merely at moments, but for a sufficient length of
time, and with sufficient consciousness, to enable one to reproduce by
deliberate art what has thus been apprehended, and “to fix in lasting
thoughts the wavering images that float before the mind.” It is as if,
when genius appears in an individual, a far larger measure of the power of
knowledge falls to his lot than is necessary for the service of an
individual will; and this superfluity of knowledge, being free, now
becomes subject purified from will, a clear mirror of the inner nature of
the world. This explains the activity, amounting even to disquietude, of
men of genius, for the present can seldom satisfy them, because it does
not fill their consciousness. This gives them that restless aspiration,
that unceasing desire for new things, and for the contemplation of lofty
things, and also that longing that is hardly ever satisfied, for men of
similar nature and of like stature, to whom they might communicate
themselves; whilst the common mortal, entirely filled and satisfied by the
common present, ends in it, and finding everywhere his like, enjoys that
peculiar satisfaction in daily life that is denied to genius.

Imagination has rightly been recognised as an essential element of genius;
it has sometimes even been regarded as identical with it; but this is a
mistake. As the objects of genius are the eternal Ideas, the permanent,
essential forms of the world and all its phenomena, and as the knowledge
of the Idea is necessarily knowledge through perception, is not abstract,
the knowledge of the genius would be limited to the Ideas of the objects
actually present to his person, and dependent upon the chain of
circumstances that brought these objects to him, if his imagination did
not extend his horizon far beyond the limits of his actual personal
existence, and thus enable him to construct the whole out of the little
that comes into his own actual apperception, and so to let almost all
possible scenes of life pass before him in his own consciousness. Further,
the actual objects are almost always very imperfect copies of the Ideas
expressed in them; therefore the man of genius requires imagination in
order to see in things, not that which Nature has actually made, but that
which she endeavoured to make, yet could not because of that conflict of
her forms among themselves which we referred to in the last book. We shall
return to this farther on in treating of sculpture. The imagination then
extends the intellectual horizon of the man of genius beyond the objects
which actually present themselves to him, both as regards quality and
quantity. Therefore extraordinary strength of imagination accompanies, and
is indeed a necessary condition of genius. But the converse does not hold,
for strength of imagination does not indicate genius; on the contrary, men
who have no touch of genius may have much imagination. For as it is
possible to consider a real object in two opposite ways, purely
objectively, the way of genius grasping its Idea, or in the common way,
merely in the relations in which it stands to other objects and to one’s
own will, in accordance with the principle of sufficient reason, it is
also possible to perceive an imaginary object in both of these ways.
Regarded in the first way, it is a means to the knowledge of the Idea, the
communication of which is the work of art; in the second case, the
imaginary object is used to build castles in the air congenial to egotism
and the individual humour, and which for the moment delude and gratify;
thus only the relations of the phantasies so linked together are known.
The man who indulges in such an amusement is a dreamer; he will easily
mingle those fancies that delight his solitude with reality, and so unfit
himself for real life: perhaps he will write them down, and then we shall
have the ordinary novel of every description, which entertains those who
are like him and the public at large, for the readers imagine themselves
in the place of the hero, and then find the story very agreeable.

The common mortal, that manufacture of Nature which she produces by the
thousand every day, is, as we have said, not capable, at least not
continuously so, of observation that in every sense is wholly
disinterested, as sensuous contemplation, strictly so called, is. He can
turn his attention to things only so far as they have some relation to his
will, however indirect it may be. Since in this respect, which never
demands anything but the knowledge of relations, the abstract conception
of the thing is sufficient, and for the most part even better adapted for
use; the ordinary man does not linger long over the mere perception, does
not fix his attention long on one object, but in all that is presented to
him hastily seeks merely the concept under which it is to be brought, as
the lazy man seeks a chair, and then it interests him no further. This is
why he is so soon done with everything, with works of art, objects of
natural beauty, and indeed everywhere with the truly significant
contemplation of all the scenes of life. He does not linger; only seeks to
know his own way in life, together with all that might at any time become
his way. Thus he makes topographical notes in the widest sense; over the
consideration of life itself as such he wastes no time. The man of genius,
on the other hand, whose excessive power of knowledge frees it at times
from the service of will, dwells on the consideration of life itself,
strives to comprehend the Idea of each thing, not its relations to other
things; and in doing this he often forgets to consider his own path in
life, and therefore for the most part pursues it awkwardly enough. While
to the ordinary man his faculty of knowledge is a lamp to lighten his
path, to the man of genius it is the sun which reveals the world. This
great diversity in their way of looking at life soon becomes visible in
the outward appearance both of the man of genius and of the ordinary
mortal. The man in whom genius lives and works is easily distinguished by
his glance, which is both keen and steady, and bears the stamp of
perception, of contemplation. This is easily seen from the likenesses of
the few men of genius whom Nature has produced here and there among
countless millions. On the other hand, in the case of an ordinary man, the
true object of his contemplation, what he is prying into, can be easily
seen from his glance, if indeed it is not quite stupid and vacant, as is
generally the case. Therefore the expression of genius in a face consists
in this, that in it a decided predominance of knowledge over will is
visible, and consequently there also shows itself in it a knowledge that
is entirely devoid of relation to will, i.e., pure knowing. On the
contrary, in ordinary countenances there is a predominant expression of
will; and we see that knowledge only comes into activity under the impulse
of will, and thus is directed merely by motives.

Since the knowledge that pertains to genius, or the knowledge of Ideas, is
that knowledge which does not follow the principle of sufficient reason,
so, on the other hand, the knowledge which does follow that principle is
that which gives us prudence and rationality in life, and which creates
the sciences. Thus men of genius are affected with the deficiencies
entailed in the neglect of this latter kind of knowledge. Yet what I say
in this regard is subject to the limitation that it only concerns them in
so far as and while they are actually engaged in that kind of knowledge
which is peculiar to genius; and this is by no means at every moment of
their lives, for the great though spontaneous exertion which is demanded
for the comprehension of Ideas free from will must necessarily relax, and
there are long intervals during which men of genius are placed in very
much the same position as ordinary mortals, both as regards advantages and
deficiencies. On this account the action of genius has always been
regarded as an inspiration, as indeed the name indicates, as the action of
a superhuman being distinct from the individual himself, and which takes
possession of him only periodically. The disinclination of men of genius
to direct their attention to the content of the principle of sufficient
reason will first show itself, with regard to the ground of being, as
dislike of mathematics; for its procedure is based upon the most universal
forms of the phenomenon space and time, which are themselves merely modes
of the principle of sufficient reason, and is consequently precisely the
opposite of that method of thought which seeks merely the content of the
phenomenon, the Idea which expresses itself in it apart from all
relations. The logical method of mathematics is also antagonistic to
genius, for it does not satisfy but obstructs true insight, and presents
merely a chain of conclusions in accordance with the principle of the
ground of knowing. The mental faculty upon which it makes the greatest
claim is memory, for it is necessary to recollect all the earlier
propositions which are referred to. Experience has also proved that men of
great artistic genius have no faculty for mathematics; no man was ever
very distinguished for both. Alfieri relates that he was never able to
understand the fourth proposition of Euclid. Goethe was constantly
reproached with his want of mathematical knowledge by the ignorant
opponents of his theory of colours. Here certainly, where it was not a
question of calculation and measurement upon hypothetical data, but of
direct knowledge by the understanding of causes and effects, this reproach
was so utterly absurd and inappropriate, that by making it they have
exposed their entire want of judgment, just as much as by the rest of
their ridiculous arguments. The fact that up to the present day, nearly
half a century after the appearance of Goethe’s theory of colours, even in
Germany the Newtonian fallacies still have undisturbed possession of the
professorial chair, and men continue to speak quite seriously of the seven
homogeneous rays of light and their different refrangibility, will some
day be numbered among the great intellectual peculiarities of men
generally, and especially of Germans. From the same cause as we have
referred to above, may be explained the equally well-known fact that,
conversely, admirable mathematicians have very little susceptibility for
works of fine art. This is very naïvely expressed in the well-known
anecdote of the French mathematician, who, after having read Racine’s
“Iphigenia,” shrugged his shoulders and asked, “Qu’est ce que cela
prouve?” Further, as quick comprehension of relations in accordance with
the laws of causality and motivation is what specially constitutes
prudence or sagacity, a prudent man, so far as and while he is so, will
not be a genius, and a man of genius, so far as and while he is so, will
not be a prudent man. Lastly, perceptive knowledge generally, in the
province of which the Idea always lies, is directly opposed to rational or
abstract knowledge, which is guided by the principle of the ground of
knowing. It is also well known that we seldom find great genius united
with pre-eminent reasonableness; on the contrary, persons of genius are
often subject to violent emotions and irrational passions. But the ground
of this is not weakness of reason, but partly unwonted energy of that
whole phenomenon of will—the man of genius—which expresses itself through
the violence of all his acts of will, and partly preponderance of the
knowledge of perception through the senses and understanding over abstract
knowledge, producing a decided tendency to the perceptible, the
exceedingly lively impressions of which so far outshine colourless
concepts, that they take their place in the guidance of action, which
consequently becomes irrational. Accordingly the impression of the present
moment is very strong with such persons, and carries them away into
unconsidered action, violent emotions and passions. Moreover, since, in
general, the knowledge of persons of genius has to some extent freed
itself from the service of will, they will not in conversation think so
much of the person they are addressing as of the thing they are speaking
about, which is vividly present to them; and therefore they are likely to
judge or narrate things too objectively for their own interests; they will
not pass over in silence what would more prudently be concealed, and so
forth. Finally, they are given to soliloquising, and in general may
exhibit certain weaknesses which are actually akin to madness. It has
often been remarked that there is a side at which genius and madness
touch, and even pass over into each other, and indeed poetical inspiration
has been called a kind of madness: amabilis insania, Horace calls it
(Od. iii. 4), and Wieland in the introduction to “Oberon” speaks of it as
“amiable madness.” Even Aristotle, as quoted by Seneca (De Tranq. Animi,
15, 16), is reported to have said: Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura
dementiæ fuit. Plato expresses it in the figure of the dark cave,
referred to above (De Rep. 7), when he says: “Those who, outside the cave,
have seen the true sunlight and the things that have true being (Ideas),
cannot afterwards see properly down in the cave, because their eyes are
not accustomed to the darkness; they cannot distinguish the shadows, and
are jeered at for their mistakes by those who have never left the cave and
its shadows.” In the “Phædrus” also (p. 317), he distinctly says that
there can be no true poet without a certain madness; in fact, (p. 327),
that every one appears mad who recognises the eternal Ideas in fleeting
things. Cicero also quotes: Negat enim sine furore, Democritus, quemquam
poetam magnum esse posse; quod idem dicit Plato (De Divin., i. 37). And,
lastly, Pope says—


    “Great wits to madness sure are near allied,
    And thin partitions do their bounds divide.”


Especially instructive in this respect is Goethe’s “Torquato Tasso,” in
which he shows us not only the suffering, the martyrdom of genius as such,
but also how it constantly passes into madness. Finally, the fact of the
direct connection of genius and madness is established by the biographies
of great men of genius, such as Rousseau, Byron, and Alfieri, and by
anecdotes from the lives of others. On the other hand, I must mention
that, by a diligent search in lunatic asylums, I have found individual
cases of patients who were unquestionably endowed with great talents, and
whose genius distinctly appeared through their madness, which, however,
had completely gained the upper hand. Now this cannot be ascribed to
chance, for on the one hand the number of mad persons is relatively very
small, and on the other hand a person of genius is a phenomenon which is
rare beyond all ordinary estimation, and only appears in nature as the
greatest exception. It will be sufficient to convince us of this if we
compare the number of really great men of genius that the whole of
civilised Europe has produced, both in ancient and modern times, with the
two hundred and fifty millions who are always living in Europe, and who
change entirely every thirty years. In estimating the number of men of
outstanding genius, we must of course only count those who have produced
works which have retained through all time an enduring value for mankind.
I shall not refrain from mentioning, that I have known some persons of
decided, though not remarkable, mental superiority, who also showed a
slight trace of insanity. It might seem from this that every advance of
intellect beyond the ordinary measure, as an abnormal development,
disposes to madness. In the meantime, however, I will explain as briefly
as possible my view of the purely intellectual ground of the relation
between genius and madness, for this will certainly assist the explanation
of the real nature of genius, that is to say, of that mental endowment
which alone can produce genuine works of art. But this necessitates a
brief explanation of madness itself.(50)

A clear and complete insight into the nature of madness, a correct and
distinct conception of what constitutes the difference between the sane
and the insane, has, as far as I know, not as yet been found. Neither
reason nor understanding can be denied to madmen, for they talk and
understand, and often draw very accurate conclusions; they also, as a
rule, perceive what is present quite correctly, and apprehend the
connection between cause and effect. Visions, like the phantasies of
delirium, are no ordinary symptom of madness: delirium falsifies
perception, madness the thoughts. For the most part, madmen do not err in
the knowledge of what is immediately present; their raving always
relates to what is absent and past, and only through these to their
connection with what is present. Therefore it seems to me that their
malady specially concerns the memory; not indeed that memory fails them
entirely, for many of them know a great deal by heart, and sometimes
recognise persons whom they have not seen for a long time; but rather that
the thread of memory is broken, the continuity of its connection
destroyed, and no uniformly connected recollection of the past is
possible. Particular scenes of the past are known correctly, just like the
particular present; but there are gaps in their recollection which they
fill up with fictions, and these are either always the same, in which case
they become fixed ideas, and the madness that results is called monomania
or melancholy; or they are always different, momentary fancies, and then
it is called folly, fatuitas. This is why it is so difficult to find out
their former life from lunatics when they enter an asylum. The true and
the false are always mixed up in their memory. Although the immediate
present is correctly known, it becomes falsified through its fictitious
connection with an imaginary past; they therefore regard themselves and
others as identical with persons who exist only in their imaginary past;
they do not recognise some of their acquaintances at all, and thus while
they perceive correctly what is actually present, they have only false
conceptions of its relations to what is absent. If the madness reaches a
high degree, there is complete absence of memory, so that the madman is
quite incapable of any reference to what is absent or past, and is only
determined by the caprice of the moment in connection with the fictions
which, in his mind, fill the past. In such a case, we are never for a
moment safe from violence or murder, unless we constantly make the madman
aware of the presence of superior force. The knowledge of the madman has
this in common with that of the brute, both are confined to the present.
What distinguishes them is that the brute has really no idea of the past
as such, though the past acts upon it through the medium of custom, so
that, for example, the dog recognises its former master even after years,
that is to say, it receives the wonted impression at the sight of him; but
of the time that has passed since it saw him it has no recollection. The
madman, on the other hand, always carries about in his reason an abstract
past, but it is a false past, which exists only for him, and that either
constantly, or only for the moment. The influence of this false past
prevents the use of the true knowledge of the present which the brute is
able to make. The fact that violent mental suffering or unexpected and
terrible calamities should often produce madness, I explain in the
following manner. All such suffering is as an actual event confined to the
present. It is thus merely transitory, and is consequently never
excessively heavy; it only becomes unendurably great when it is lasting
pain; but as such it exists only in thought, and therefore lies in the
memory. If now such a sorrow, such painful knowledge or reflection, is
so bitter that it becomes altogether unbearable, and the individual is
prostrated under it, then, terrified Nature seizes upon madness as the
last resource of life; the mind so fearfully tortured at once destroys the
thread of its memory, fills up the gaps with fictions, and thus seeks
refuge in madness from the mental suffering that exceeds its strength,
just as we cut off a mortified limb and replace it with a wooden one. The
distracted Ajax, King Lear, and Ophelia may be taken as examples; for the
creations of true genius, to which alone we can refer here, as universally
known, are equal in truth to real persons; besides, in this case, frequent
actual experience shows the same thing. A faint analogy of this kind of
transition from pain to madness is to be found in the way in which all of
us often seek, as it were mechanically, to drive away a painful thought
that suddenly occurs to us by some loud exclamation or quick movement—to
turn ourselves from it, to distract our minds by force.

We see, from what has been said, that the madman has a true knowledge of
what is actually present, and also of certain particulars of the past, but
that he mistakes the connection, the relations, and therefore falls into
error and talks nonsense. Now this is exactly the point at which he comes
into contact with the man of genius; for he also leaves out of sight the
knowledge of the connection of things, since he neglects that knowledge of
relations which conforms to the principle of sufficient reason, in order
to see in things only their Ideas, and to seek to comprehend their true
nature, which manifests itself to perception, and in regard to which one
thing represents its whole species, in which way, as Goethe says, one
case is valid for a thousand. The particular object of his contemplation,
or the present which is perceived by him with extraordinary vividness,
appear in so strong a light that the other links of the chain to which
they belong are at once thrown into the shade, and this gives rise to
phenomena which have long been recognised as resembling those of madness.
That which in particular given things exists only incompletely and
weakened by modifications, is raised by the man of genius, through his way
of contemplating it, to the Idea of the thing, to completeness: he
therefore sees everywhere extremes, and therefore his own action tends to
extremes; he cannot hit the mean, he lacks soberness, and the result is
what we have said. He knows the Ideas completely but not the individuals.
Therefore it has been said that a poet may know mankind deeply and
thoroughly, and may yet have a very imperfect knowledge of men. He is
easily deceived, and is a tool in the hands of the crafty.

§ 37. Genius, then, consists, according to our explanation, in the
capacity for knowing, independently of the principle of sufficient reason,
not individual things, which have their existence only in their relations,
but the Ideas of such things, and of being oneself the correlative of the
Idea, and thus no longer an individual, but the pure subject of knowledge.
Yet this faculty must exist in all men in a smaller and different degree;
for if not, they would be just as incapable of enjoying works of art as of
producing them; they would have no susceptibility for the beautiful or the
sublime; indeed, these words could have no meaning for them. We must
therefore assume that there exists in all men this power of knowing the
Ideas in things, and consequently of transcending their personality for
the moment, unless indeed there are some men who are capable of no
æsthetic pleasure at all. The man of genius excels ordinary men only by
possessing this kind of knowledge in a far higher degree and more
continuously. Thus, while under its influence he retains the presence of
mind which is necessary to enable him to repeat in a voluntary and
intentional work what he has learned in this manner; and this repetition
is the work of art. Through this he communicates to others the Idea he has
grasped. This Idea remains unchanged and the same, so that æsthetic
pleasure is one and the same whether it is called forth by a work of art
or directly by the contemplation of nature and life. The work of art is
only a means of facilitating the knowledge in which this pleasure
consists. That the Idea comes to us more easily from the work of art than
directly from nature and the real world, arises from the fact that the
artist, who knew only the Idea, no longer the actual, has reproduced in
his work the pure Idea, has abstracted it from the actual, omitting all
disturbing accidents. The artist lets us see the world through his eyes.
That he has these eyes, that he knows the inner nature of things apart
from all their relations, is the gift of genius, is inborn; but that he is
able to lend us this gift, to let us see with his eyes, is acquired, and
is the technical side of art. Therefore, after the account which I have
given in the preceding pages of the inner nature of æsthetical knowledge
in its most general outlines, the following more exact philosophical
treatment of the beautiful and the sublime will explain them both, in
nature and in art, without separating them further. First of all we shall
consider what takes place in a man when he is affected by the beautiful
and the sublime; whether he derives this emotion directly from nature,
from life, or partakes of it only through the medium of art, does not make
any essential, but merely an external, difference.

§ 38. In the æsthetical mode of contemplation we have found two
inseparable constituent parts—the knowledge of the object, not as
individual thing but as Platonic Idea, that is, as the enduring form of
this whole species of things; and the self-consciousness of the knowing
person, not as individual, but as pure will-less subject of knowledge.
The condition under which both these constituent parts appear always
united was found to be the abandonment of the method of knowing which is
bound to the principle of sufficient reason, and which, on the other hand,
is the only kind of knowledge that is of value for the service of the will
and also for science. Moreover, we shall see that the pleasure which is
produced by the contemplation of the beautiful arises from these two
constituent parts, sometimes more from the one, sometimes more from the
other, according to what the object of the æsthetical contemplation may
be.

All willing arises from want, therefore from deficiency, and therefore
from suffering. The satisfaction of a wish ends it; yet for one wish that
is satisfied there remain at least ten which are denied. Further, the
desire lasts long, the demands are infinite; the satisfaction is short and
scantily measured out. But even the final satisfaction is itself only
apparent; every satisfied wish at once makes room for a new one; both are
illusions; the one is known to be so, the other not yet. No attained
object of desire can give lasting satisfaction, but merely a fleeting
gratification; it is like the alms thrown to the beggar, that keeps him
alive to-day that his misery may be prolonged till the morrow. Therefore,
so long as our consciousness is filled by our will, so long as we are
given up to the throng of desires with their constant hopes and fears, so
long as we are the subject of willing, we can never have lasting happiness
nor peace. It is essentially all the same whether we pursue or flee, fear
injury or seek enjoyment; the care for the constant demands of the will,
in whatever form it may be, continually occupies and sways the
consciousness; but without peace no true well-being is possible. The
subject of willing is thus constantly stretched on the revolving wheel of
Ixion, pours water into the sieve of the Danaids, is the ever-longing
Tantalus.

But when some external cause or inward disposition lifts us suddenly out
of the endless stream of willing, delivers knowledge from the slavery of
the will, the attention is no longer directed to the motives of willing,
but comprehends things free from their relation to the will, and thus
observes them without personal interest, without subjectivity, purely
objectively, gives itself entirely up to them so far as they are ideas,
but not in so far as they are motives. Then all at once the peace which we
were always seeking, but which always fled from us on the former path of
the desires, comes to us of its own accord, and it is well with us. It is
the painless state which Epicurus prized as the highest good and as the
state of the gods; for we are for the moment set free from the miserable
striving of the will; we keep the Sabbath of the penal servitude of
willing; the wheel of Ixion stands still.

But this is just the state which I described above as necessary for the
knowledge of the Idea, as pure contemplation, as sinking oneself in
perception, losing oneself in the object, forgetting all individuality,
surrendering that kind of knowledge which follows the principle of
sufficient reason, and comprehends only relations; the state by means of
which at once and inseparably the perceived particular thing is raised to
the Idea of its whole species, and the knowing individual to the pure
subject of will-less knowledge, and as such they are both taken out of the
stream of time and all other relations. It is then all one whether we see
the sun set from the prison or from the palace.

Inward disposition, the predominance of knowing over willing, can produce
this state under any circumstances. This is shown by those admirable Dutch
artists who directed this purely objective perception to the most
insignificant objects, and established a lasting monument of their
objectivity and spiritual peace in their pictures of still life, which
the æsthetic beholder does not look on without emotion; for they present
to him the peaceful, still, frame of mind of the artist, free from will,
which was needed to contemplate such insignificant things so objectively,
to observe them so attentively, and to repeat this perception so
intelligently; and as the picture enables the onlooker to participate in
this state, his emotion is often increased by the contrast between it and
the unquiet frame of mind, disturbed by vehement willing, in which he
finds himself. In the same spirit, landscape-painters, and particularly
Ruisdael, have often painted very insignificant country scenes, which
produce the same effect even more agreeably.

All this is accomplished by the inner power of an artistic nature alone;
but that purely objective disposition is facilitated and assisted from
without by suitable objects, by the abundance of natural beauty which
invites contemplation, and even presses itself upon us. Whenever it
discloses itself suddenly to our view, it almost always succeeds in
delivering us, though it may be only for a moment, from subjectivity, from
the slavery of the will, and in raising us to the state of pure knowing.
This is why the man who is tormented by passion, or want, or care, is so
suddenly revived, cheered, and restored by a single free glance into
nature: the storm of passion, the pressure of desire and fear, and all the
miseries of willing are then at once, and in a marvellous manner, calmed
and appeased. For at the moment at which, freed from the will, we give
ourselves up to pure will-less knowing, we pass into a world from which
everything is absent that influenced our will and moved us so violently
through it. This freeing of knowledge lifts us as wholly and entirely away
from all that, as do sleep and dreams; happiness and unhappiness have
disappeared; we are no longer individual; the individual is forgotten; we
are only pure subject of knowledge; we are only that one eye of the
world which looks out from all knowing creatures, but which can become
perfectly free from the service of will in man alone. Thus all difference
of individuality so entirely disappears, that it is all the same whether
the perceiving eye belongs to a mighty king or to a wretched beggar; for
neither joy nor complaining can pass that boundary with us. So near us
always lies a sphere in which we escape from all our misery; but who has
the strength to continue long in it? As soon as any single relation to our
will, to our person, even of these objects of our pure contemplation,
comes again into consciousness, the magic is at an end; we fall back into
the knowledge which is governed by the principle of sufficient reason; we
know no longer the Idea, but the particular thing, the link of a chain to
which we also belong, and we are again abandoned to all our woe. Most men
remain almost always at this standpoint because they entirely lack
objectivity, i.e., genius. Therefore they have no pleasure in being
alone with nature; they need company, or at least a book. For their
knowledge remains subject to their will; they seek, therefore, in objects,
only some relation to their will, and whenever they see anything that has
no such relation, there sounds within them, like a ground bass in music,
the constant inconsolable cry, “It is of no use to me;” thus in solitude
the most beautiful surroundings have for them a desolate, dark, strange,
and hostile appearance.

Lastly, it is this blessedness of will-less perception which casts an
enchanting glamour over the past and distant, and presents them to us in
so fair a light by means of self-deception. For as we think of days long
gone by, days in which we lived in a distant place, it is only the objects
which our fancy recalls, not the subject of will, which bore about with it
then its incurable sorrows just as it bears them now; but they are
forgotten, because since then they have often given place to others. Now,
objective perception acts with regard to what is remembered just as it
would in what is present, if we let it have influence over us, if we
surrendered ourselves to it free from will. Hence it arises that,
especially when we are more than ordinarily disturbed by some want, the
remembrance of past and distant scenes suddenly flits across our minds
like a lost paradise. The fancy recalls only what was objective, not what
was individually subjective, and we imagine that that objective stood
before us then just as pure and undisturbed by any relation to the will as
its image stands in our fancy now; while in reality the relation of the
objects to our will gave us pain then just as it does now. We can deliver
ourselves from all suffering just as well through present objects as
through distant ones whenever we raise ourselves to a purely objective
contemplation of them, and so are able to bring about the illusion that
only the objects are present and not we ourselves. Then, as the pure
subject of knowledge, freed from the miserable self, we become entirely
one with these objects, and, for the moment, our wants are as foreign to
us as they are to them. The world as idea alone remains, and the world as
will has disappeared.

In all these reflections it has been my object to bring out clearly the
nature and the scope of the subjective element in æsthetic pleasure; the
deliverance of knowledge from the service of the will, the forgetting of
self as an individual, and the raising of the consciousness to the pure
will-less, timeless, subject of knowledge, independent of all relations.
With this subjective side of æsthetic contemplation, there must always
appear as its necessary correlative the objective side, the intuitive
comprehension of the Platonic Idea. But before we turn to the closer
consideration of this, and to the achievements of art in relation to it,
it is better that we should pause for a little at the subjective side of
æsthetic pleasure, in order to complete our treatment of this by
explaining the impression of the sublime which depends altogether upon
it, and arises from a modification of it. After that we shall complete our
investigation of æsthetic pleasure by considering its objective side.

But we must first add the following remarks to what has been said. Light
is the pleasantest and most gladdening of things; it has become the symbol
of all that is good and salutary. In all religions it symbolises
salvation, while darkness symbolises damnation. Ormuzd dwells in the
purest light, Ahrimines in eternal night. Dante’s Paradise would look very
much like Vauxhall in London, for all the blessed spirits appear as points
of light and arrange themselves in regular figures. The very absence of
light makes us sad; its return cheers us. Colours excite directly a keen
delight, which reaches its highest degree when they are transparent. All
this depends entirely upon the fact that light is the correlative and
condition of the most perfect kind of knowledge of perception, the only
knowledge which does not in any way affect the will. For sight, unlike the
affections of the other senses, cannot, in itself, directly and through
its sensuous effect, make the sensation of the special organ agreeable
or disagreeable; that is, it has no immediate connection with the will.
Such a quality can only belong to the perception which arises in the
understanding, and then it lies in the relation of the object to the will.
In the case of hearing this is to some extent otherwise; sounds can give
pain directly, and they may also be sensuously agreeable, directly and
without regard to harmony or melody. Touch, as one with the feeling of the
whole body, is still more subordinated to this direct influence upon the
will; and yet there is such a thing as a sensation of touch which is
neither painful nor pleasant. But smells are always either agreeable or
disagreeable, and tastes still more so. Thus the last two senses are most
closely related to the will, and therefore they are always the most
ignoble, and have been called by Kant the subjective senses. The pleasure
which we experience from light is in fact only the pleasure which arises
from the objective possibility of the purest and fullest perceptive
knowledge, and as such it may be traced to the fact that pure knowledge,
freed and delivered from all will, is in the highest degree pleasant, and
of itself constitutes a large part of æsthetic enjoyment. Again, we must
refer to this view of light the incredible beauty which we associate with
the reflection of objects in water. That lightest, quickest, finest
species of the action of bodies upon each other, that to which we owe by
far the completest and purest of our perceptions, the action of reflected
rays of light, is here brought clearly before our eyes, distinct and
perfect, in cause and in effect, and indeed in its entirety, hence the
æsthetic delight it gives us, which, in the most important aspect, is
entirely based on the subjective ground of æsthetic pleasure, and is
delight in pure knowing and its method.

§ 39. All these reflections are intended to bring out the subjective part
of æsthetic pleasure; that is to say, that pleasure so far as it consists
simply of delight in perceptive knowledge as such, in opposition to will.
And as directly connected with this, there naturally follows the
explanation of that disposition or frame of mind which has been called the
sense of the sublime.

We have already remarked above that the transition to the state of pure
perception takes place most easily when the objects bend themselves to it,
that is, when by their manifold and yet definite and distinct form they
easily become representatives of their Ideas, in which beauty, in the
objective sense, consists. This quality belongs pre-eminently to natural
beauty, which thus affords even to the most insensible at least a fleeting
æsthetic satisfaction: indeed it is so remarkable how especially the
vegetable world invites æsthetic observation, and, as it were, presses
itself upon it, that one might say, that these advances are connected with
the fact that these organisms, unlike the bodies of animals, are not
themselves immediate objects of knowledge, and therefore require the
assistance of a foreign intelligent individual in order to rise out of the
world of blind will and enter the world of idea, and that thus they long,
as it were, for this entrance, that they may attain at least indirectly
what is denied them directly. But I leave this suggestion which I have
hazarded, and which borders perhaps upon extravagance, entirely undecided,
for only a very intimate and devoted consideration of nature can raise or
justify it.(51) As long as that which raises us from the knowledge of mere
relations subject to the will, to æsthetic contemplation, and thereby
exalts us to the position of the subject of knowledge free from will, is
this fittingness of nature, this significance and distinctness of its
forms, on account of which the Ideas individualised in them readily
present themselves to us; so long is it merely beauty that affects us
and the sense of the beautiful that is excited. But if these very
objects whose significant forms invite us to pure contemplation, have a
hostile relation to the human will in general, as it exhibits itself in
its objectivity, the human body, if they are opposed to it, so that it is
menaced by the irresistible predominance of their power, or sinks into
insignificance before their immeasurable greatness; if, nevertheless, the
beholder does not direct his attention to this eminently hostile relation
to his will, but, although perceiving and recognising it, turns
consciously away from it, forcibly detaches himself from his will and its
relations, and, giving himself up entirely to knowledge, quietly
contemplates those very objects that are so terrible to the will,
comprehends only their Idea, which is foreign to all relation, so that he
lingers gladly over its contemplation, and is thereby raised above
himself, his person, his will, and all will:—in that case he is filled
with the sense of the sublime, he is in the state of spiritual
exaltation, and therefore the object producing such a state is called
sublime. Thus what distinguishes the sense of the sublime from that of
the beautiful is this: in the case of the beautiful, pure knowledge has
gained the upper hand without a struggle, for the beauty of the object,
i.e., that property which facilitates the knowledge of its Idea, has
removed from consciousness without resistance, and therefore
imperceptibly, the will and the knowledge of relations which is subject to
it, so that what is left is the pure subject of knowledge without even a
remembrance of will. On the other hand, in the case of the sublime that
state of pure knowledge is only attained by a conscious and forcible
breaking away from the relations of the same object to the will, which are
recognised as unfavourable, by a free and conscious transcending of the
will and the knowledge related to it.

This exaltation must not only be consciously won, but also consciously
retained, and it is therefore accompanied by a constant remembrance of
will; yet not of a single particular volition, such as fear or desire, but
of human volition in general, so far as it is universally expressed in its
objectivity the human body. If a single real act of will were to come into
consciousness, through actual personal pressure and danger from the
object, then the individual will thus actually influenced would at once
gain the upper hand, the peace of contemplation would become impossible,
the impression of the sublime would be lost, because it yields to the
anxiety, in which the effort of the individual to right itself has sunk
every other thought. A few examples will help very much to elucidate this
theory of the æsthetic sublime and remove all doubt with regard to it; at
the same time they will bring out the different degrees of this sense of
the sublime. It is in the main identical with that of the beautiful, with
pure will-less knowing, and the knowledge, that necessarily accompanies it
of Ideas out of all relation determined by the principle of sufficient
reason, and it is distinguished from the sense of the beautiful only by
the additional quality that it rises above the known hostile relation of
the object contemplated to the will in general. Thus there come to be
various degrees of the sublime, and transitions from the beautiful to the
sublime, according as this additional quality is strong, bold, urgent,
near, or weak, distant, and merely indicated. I think it is more in
keeping with the plan of my treatise, first to give examples of these
transitions, and of the weaker degrees of the impression of the sublime,
although persons whose æsthetical susceptibility in general is not very
great, and whose imagination is not very lively, will only understand the
examples given later of the higher and more distinct grades of that
impression; and they should therefore confine themselves to these, and
pass over the examples of the very weak degrees of the sublime that are to
be given first.

As man is at once impetuous and blind striving of will (whose pole or
focus lies in the genital organs), and eternal, free, serene subject of
pure knowing (whose pole is the brain); so, corresponding to this
antithesis, the sun is both the source of light, the condition of the
most perfect kind of knowledge, and therefore of the most delightful of
things—and the source of warmth, the first condition of life, i.e., of
all phenomena of will in its higher grades. Therefore, what warmth is for
the will, light is for knowledge. Light is the largest gem in the crown of
beauty, and has the most marked influence on the knowledge of every
beautiful object. Its presence is an indispensable condition of beauty;
its favourable disposition increases the beauty of the most beautiful.
Architectural beauty more than any other object is enhanced by favourable
light, though even the most insignificant things become through its
influence most beautiful. If, in the dead of winter, when all nature is
frozen and stiff, we see the rays of the setting sun reflected by masses
of stone, illuminating without warming, and thus favourable only to the
purest kind of knowledge, not to the will; the contemplation of the
beautiful effect of the light upon these masses lifts us, as does all
beauty, into a state of pure knowing. But, in this case, a certain
transcending of the interests of the will is needed to enable us to rise
into the state of pure knowing, because there is a faint recollection of
the lack of warmth from these rays, that is, an absence of the principle
of life; there is a slight challenge to persist in pure knowing, and to
refrain from all willing, and therefore it is an example of a transition
from the sense of the beautiful to that of the sublime. It is the faintest
trace of the sublime in the beautiful; and beauty itself is indeed present
only in a slight degree. The following is almost as weak an example.

Let us imagine ourselves transported to a very lonely place, with unbroken
horizon, under a cloudless sky, trees and plants in the perfectly
motionless air, no animals, no men, no running water, the deepest silence.
Such surroundings are, as it were, a call to seriousness and
contemplation, apart from all will and its cravings; but this is just what
imparts to such a scene of desolate stillness a touch of the sublime. For,
because it affords no object, either favourable or unfavourable, for the
will which is constantly in need of striving and attaining, there only
remains the state of pure contemplation, and whoever is incapable of this,
is ignominiously abandoned to the vacancy of unoccupied will, and the
misery of ennui. So far it is a test of our intellectual worth, of which,
generally speaking, the degree of our power of enduring solitude, or our
love of it, is a good criterion. The scene we have sketched affords us,
then, an example of the sublime in a low degree, for in it, with the state
of pure knowing in its peace and all-sufficiency, there is mingled, by way
of contrast, the recollection of the dependence and poverty of the will
which stands in need of constant action. This is the species of the
sublime for which the sight of the boundless prairies of the interior of
North America is celebrated.

But let us suppose such a scene, stripped also of vegetation, and showing
only naked rocks; then from the entire absence of that organic life which
is necessary for existence, the will at once becomes uneasy, the desert
assumes a terrible aspect, our mood becomes more tragic; the elevation to
the sphere of pure knowing takes place with a more decided tearing of
ourselves away from the interests of the will; and because we persist in
continuing in the state of pure knowing, the sense of the sublime
distinctly appears.

The following situation may occasion this feeling in a still higher
degree: Nature convulsed by a storm; the sky darkened by black threatening
thunder-clouds; stupendous, naked, overhanging cliffs, completely shutting
out the view; rushing, foaming torrents; absolute desert; the wail of the
wind sweeping through the clefts of the rocks. Our dependence, our strife
with hostile nature, our will broken in the conflict, now appears visibly
before our eyes. Yet, so long as the personal pressure does not gain the
upper hand, but we continue in æsthetic contemplation, the pure subject of
knowing gazes unshaken and unconcerned through that strife of nature,
through that picture of the broken will, and quietly comprehends the Ideas
even of those objects which are threatening and terrible to the will. In
this contrast lies the sense of the sublime.

But the impression becomes still stronger, if, when we have before our
eyes, on a large scale, the battle of the raging elements, in such a scene
we are prevented from hearing the sound of our own voice by the noise of a
falling stream; or, if we are abroad in the storm of tempestuous seas,
where the mountainous waves rise and fall, dash themselves furiously
against steep cliffs, and toss their spray high into the air; the storm
howls, the sea boils, the lightning flashes from black clouds, and the
peals of thunder drown the voice of storm and sea. Then, in the undismayed
beholder, the two-fold nature of his consciousness reaches the highest
degree of distinctness. He perceives himself, on the one hand, as an
individual, as the frail phenomenon of will, which the slightest touch of
these forces can utterly destroy, helpless against powerful nature,
dependent, the victim of chance, a vanishing nothing in the presence of
stupendous might; and, on the other hand, as the eternal, peaceful,
knowing subject, the condition of the object, and, therefore, the
supporter of this whole world; the terrific strife of nature only his
idea; the subject itself free and apart from all desires and necessities,
in the quiet comprehension of the Ideas. This is the complete impression
of the sublime. Here he obtains a glimpse of a power beyond all comparison
superior to the individual, threatening it with annihilation.

The impression of the sublime may be produced in quite another way, by
presenting a mere immensity in space and time; its immeasurable greatness
dwindles the individual to nothing. Adhering to Kant’s nomenclature and
his accurate division, we may call the first kind the dynamical, and the
second the mathematical sublime, although we entirely dissent from his
explanation of the inner nature of the impression, and can allow no share
in it either to moral reflections, or to hypostases from scholastic
philosophy.

If we lose ourselves in the contemplation of the infinite greatness of the
universe in space and time, meditate on the thousands of years that are
past or to come, or if the heavens at night actually bring before our eyes
innumerable worlds and so force upon our consciousness the immensity of
the universe, we feel ourselves dwindle to nothing; as individuals, as
living bodies, as transient phenomena of will, we feel ourselves pass away
and vanish into nothing like drops in the ocean. But at once there rises
against this ghost of our own nothingness, against such lying
impossibility, the immediate consciousness that all these worlds exist
only as our idea, only as modifications of the eternal subject of pure
knowing, which we find ourselves to be as soon as we forget our
individuality, and which is the necessary supporter of all worlds and all
times the condition of their possibility. The vastness of the world which
disquieted us before, rests now in us; our dependence upon it is annulled
by its dependence upon us. All this, however, does not come at once into
reflection, but shows itself merely as the felt consciousness that in some
sense or other (which philosophy alone can explain) we are one with the
world, and therefore not oppressed, but exalted by its immensity. It is
the felt consciousness of this that the Upanishads of the Vedas repeatedly
express in such a multitude of different ways; very admirably in the
saying already quoted: Hæ omnes creaturæ in totum ego sum, et præter me
aliud ens non est (Oupnek’hat, vol. i. p. 122.) It is the transcending of
our own individuality, the sense of the sublime.

We receive this impression of the mathematical-sublime, quite directly, by
means of a space which is small indeed as compared with the world, but
which has become directly perceptible to us, and affects us with its whole
extent in all its three dimensions, so as to make our own body seem almost
infinitely small. An empty space can never be thus perceived, and
therefore never an open space, but only space that is directly perceptible
in all its dimensions by means of the limits which enclose it; thus for
example a very high, vast dome, like that of St. Peter’s at Rome, or St.
Paul’s in London. The sense of the sublime here arises through the
consciousness of the vanishing nothingness of our own body in the presence
of a vastness which, from another point of view, itself exists only in our
idea, and of which we are as knowing subject, the supporter. Thus here as
everywhere it arises from the contrast between the insignificance and
dependence of ourselves as individuals, as phenomena of will, and the
consciousness of ourselves as pure subject of knowing. Even the vault of
the starry heaven produces this if it is contemplated without reflection;
but just in the same way as the vault of stone, and only by its apparent,
not its real extent. Some objects of our perception excite in us the
feeling of the sublime because, not only on account of their spatial
vastness, but also of their great age, that is, their temporal duration,
we feel ourselves dwarfed to insignificance in their presence, and yet
revel in the pleasure of contemplating them: of this kind are very high
mountains, the Egyptian pyramids, and colossal ruins of great antiquity.

Our explanation of the sublime applies also to the ethical, to what is
called the sublime character. Such a character arises from this, that the
will is not excited by objects which are well calculated to excite it, but
that knowledge retains the upper hand in their presence. A man of sublime
character will accordingly consider men in a purely objective way, and not
with reference to the relations which they might have to his will; he
will, for example, observe their faults, even their hatred and injustice
to himself, without being himself excited to hatred; he will behold their
happiness without envy; he will recognise their good qualities without
desiring any closer relations with them; he will perceive the beauty of
women, but he will not desire them. His personal happiness or unhappiness
will not greatly affect him, he will rather be as Hamlet describes
Horatio:—


            “... for thou hast been,
    As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing;
    A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards
    Hast ta’en with equal thanks,” &c. (A. 3. Sc. 2.)


For in the course of his own life and its misfortunes, he will consider
less his individual lot than that of humanity in general, and will
therefore conduct himself in its regard, rather as knowing than as
suffering.

§ 40. Opposites throw light upon each other, and therefore the remark may
be in place here, that the proper opposite of the sublime is something
which would not at the first glance be recognised, as such: the charming
or attractive. By this, however, I understand, that which excites the
will by presenting to it directly its fulfilment, its satisfaction. We saw
that the feeling of the sublime arises from the fact, that something
entirely unfavourable to the will, becomes the object of pure
contemplation, so that such contemplation can only be maintained by
persistently turning away from the will, and transcending its interests;
this constitutes the sublimity of the character. The charming or
attractive, on the contrary, draws the beholder away from the pure
contemplation which is demanded by all apprehension of the beautiful,
because it necessarily excites this will, by objects which directly appeal
to it, and thus he no longer remains pure subject of knowing, but becomes
the needy and dependent subject of will. That every beautiful thing which
is bright or cheering should be called charming, is the result of a too
general concept, which arises from a want of accurate discrimination, and
which I must entirely set aside, and indeed condemn. But in the sense of
the word which has been given and explained, I find only two species of
the charming or attractive in the province of art, and both of them are
unworthy of it. The one species, a very low one, is found in Dutch
paintings of still life, when they err by representing articles of food,
which by their deceptive likeness necessarily excite the appetite for the
things they represent, and this is just an excitement of the will, which
puts an end to all æsthetic contemplation of the object. Painted fruit is
yet admissible, because we may regard it as the further development of the
flower, and as a beautiful product of nature in form and colour, without
being obliged to think of it as eatable; but unfortunately we often find,
represented with deceptive naturalness, prepared and served dishes,
oysters, herrings, crabs, bread and butter, beer, wine, and so forth,
which is altogether to be condemned. In historical painting and in
sculpture the charming consists in naked figures, whose position, drapery,
and general treatment are calculated to excite the passions of the
beholder, and thus pure æsthetical contemplation is at once annihilated,
and the aim of art is defeated. This mistake corresponds exactly to that
which we have just censured in the Dutch paintings. The ancients are
almost always free from this fault in their representations of beauty and
complete nakedness of form, because the artist himself created them in a
purely objective spirit, filled with ideal beauty, not in the spirit of
subjective, and base sensuality. The charming is thus everywhere to be
avoided in art.

There is also a negative species of the charming or exciting which is even
more reprehensible than the positive form which has been discussed; this
is the disgusting or the loathsome. It arouses the will of the beholder,
just as what is properly speaking charming, and therefore disturbs pure
æsthetic contemplation. But it is an active aversion and opposition which
is excited by it; it arouses the will by presenting to it objects which it
abhors. Therefore it has always been recognised that it is altogether
inadmissible in art, where even what is ugly, when it is not disgusting,
is allowable in its proper place, as we shall see later.

§ 41. The course of the discussion has made it necessary to insert at this
point the treatment of the sublime, though we have only half done with the
beautiful, as we have considered its subjective side only. For it was
merely a special modification of this subjective side that distinguished
the beautiful from the sublime. This difference was found to depend upon
whether the state of pure will-less knowing, which is presupposed and
demanded by all æsthetic contemplation, was reached without opposition, by
the mere disappearance of the will from consciousness, because the object
invited and drew us towards it; or whether it was only attained through
the free, conscious transcending of the will, to which the object
contemplated had an unfavourable and even hostile relation, which would
destroy contemplation altogether, if we were to give ourselves up to it.
This is the distinction between the beautiful and the sublime. In the
object they are not essentially different, for in every case the object of
æsthetical contemplation is not the individual thing, but the Idea in it
which is striving to reveal itself; that is to say, adequate objectivity
of will at a particular grade. Its necessary correlative, independent,
like itself of the principle of sufficient reason, is the pure subject of
knowing; just as the correlative of the particular thing is the knowing
individual, both of which lie within the province of the principle of
sufficient reason.

When we say that a thing is beautiful, we thereby assert that it is an
object of our æsthetic contemplation, and this has a double meaning; on
the one hand it means that the sight of the thing makes us objective,
that is to say, that in contemplating it we are no longer conscious of
ourselves as individuals, but as pure will-less subjects of knowledge; and
on the other hand it means that we recognise in the object, not the
particular thing, but an Idea; and this can only happen, so far as our
contemplation of it is not subordinated to the principle of sufficient
reason, does not follow the relation of the object to anything outside it
(which is always ultimately connected with relations to our own will), but
rests in the object itself. For the Idea and the pure subject of knowledge
always appear at once in consciousness as necessary correlatives, and on
their appearance all distinction of time vanishes, for they are both
entirely foreign to the principle of sufficient reason in all its forms,
and lie outside the relations which are imposed by it; they may be
compared to the rainbow and the sun, which have no part in the constant
movement and succession of the falling drops. Therefore, if, for example,
I contemplate a tree æsthetically, i.e., with artistic eyes, and thus
recognise, not it, but its Idea, it becomes at once of no consequence
whether it is this tree or its predecessor which flourished a thousand
years ago, and whether the observer is this individual or any other that
lived anywhere and at any time; the particular thing and the knowing
individual are abolished with the principle of sufficient reason, and
there remains nothing but the Idea and the pure subject of knowing, which
together constitute the adequate objectivity of will at this grade. And
the Idea dispenses not only with time, but also with space, for the Idea
proper is not this special form which appears before me but its
expression, its pure significance, its inner being, which discloses itself
to me and appeals to me, and which may be quite the same though the
spatial relations of its form be very different.

Since, on the one hand, every given thing may be observed in a. purely
objective manner and apart from all relations; and since, on the other
hand, the will manifests itself in everything at some grade of its
objectivity, so that everything is the expression of an Idea; it follows
that everything is also beautiful. That even the most insignificant
things admit of pure objective and will-less contemplation, and thus prove
that they are beautiful, is shown by what was said above in this reference
about the Dutch pictures of still-life (§ 38). But one thing is more
beautiful than another, because it makes this pure objective contemplation
easier, it lends itself to it, and, so to speak, even compels it, and then
we call it very beautiful. This is the case sometimes because, as an
individual thing, it expresses in its purity the Idea of its species by
the very distinct, clearly defined, and significant relation of its parts,
and also fully reveals that Idea through the completeness of all the
possible expressions of its species united in it, so that it makes the
transition from the individual thing to the Idea, and therefore also the
condition of pure contemplation, very easy for the beholder. Sometimes
this possession of special beauty in an object lies in the fact that the
Idea itself which appeals to us in it is a high grade of the objectivity
of will, and therefore very significant and expressive. Therefore it is
that man is more beautiful than all other objects, and the revelation of
his nature is the highest aim of art. Human form and expression are the
most important objects of plastic art, and human action the most important
object of poetry. Yet each thing has its own peculiar beauty, not only
every organism which expresses itself in the unity of an individual being,
but also everything unorganised and formless, and even every manufactured
article. For all these reveal the Ideas through which the will objectifies
itself at its lowest grades, they give, as it were, the deepest resounding
bass-notes of nature. Gravity, rigidity, fluidity, light, and so forth,
are the Ideas which express themselves in rocks, in buildings, in waters.
Landscape-gardening or architecture can do no more than assist them to
unfold their qualities distinctly, fully, and variously; they can only
give them the opportunity of expressing themselves purely, so that they
lend themselves to æsthetic contemplation and make it easier. Inferior
buildings or ill-favoured localities, on the contrary, which nature has
neglected or art has spoiled, perform this task in a very slight degree or
not at all; yet even from them these universal, fundamental Ideas of
nature cannot altogether disappear. To the careful observer they present
themselves here also, and even bad buildings and the like are capable of
being æsthetically considered; the Ideas of the most universal properties
of their materials are still recognisable in them, only the artificial
form which has been given them does not assist but hinders æsthetic
contemplation. Manufactured articles also serve to express Ideas, only it
is not the Idea of the manufactured article which speaks in them, but the
Idea of the material to which this artificial form has been given. This
may be very conveniently expressed in two words, in the language of the
schoolmen, thus,—the manufactured article expresses the Idea of its forma
substantialis, but not that of its forma accidentalis; the latter leads
to no Idea, but only to a human conception of which it is the result. It
is needless to say that by manufactured article no work of plastic art is
meant. The schoolmen understand, in fact, by forma substantialis that
which I call the grade of the objectification of will in a thing. We shall
return immediately, when we treat of architecture, to the Idea of the
material. Our view, then, cannot be reconciled with that of Plato if he is
of opinion that a table or a chair express the Idea of a table or a chair
(De Rep., x., pp. 284, 285, et Parmen., p. 79, ed. Bip.), but we say that
they express the Ideas which are already expressed in their mere material
as such. According to Aristotle (Metap. xi., chap. 3), however, Plato
himself only maintained Ideas of natural objects: ὁ Πλατων εφη, ὁτι ειδη
εστιν ὁποσα φυσει (Plato dixit, quod ideæ eorum sunt, quæ natura sunt),
and in chap. 5 he says that, according to the Platonists, there are no
Ideas of house and ring. In any case, Plato’s earliest disciples, as
Alcinous informs us (Introductio  in Platonicam Philosophiam, chap.
9), denied that there were any ideas of manufactured articles. He says:
Ὁριζονται δε την ιδεαν, παραδειγμα των κατα φυσιν αιωνιον. Ουτε γαρ τοις
πλειστοις των απο Πλατωνος αρεσκει, των τεχνικων ειναι ιδεας, οἱον ασπιδος
η λυρας, ουτε μην των παρα φυσιν, οἱον πυρετου και χολερας, ουτε των κατα
μερος, οἱον Σωκρατους και Πλατωνος, αλλ᾽ ουτε των ευτελων τινος, οἱον
ρυπου και καρφους, ουτε των προς τι, οἱον μειζονος και ὑπερεχοντος; ειναι
γαρ τας ιδεας νοησεις θεου αιωνιους τε και αυτοτελεις (Definiunt autem
IDEAM exemplar æternum eorum, quæ secundum naturam existunt. Nam plurimis
ex iis, qui Platonem secuti sunt, minime placuit, arte factorum ideas
esse, ut clypei atque lyræ; neque rursus eorum, quæ prætor naturam, ut
febris et choleræ, neque particularium, ceu Socratis et Platonis; neque
etiam rerum vilium, veluti sordium et festucæ; neque relationum, ut
majoris et excedentis: esse namque ideas intellectiones dei æternas, ac
seipsis perfectas). We may take this opportunity of mentioning another
point in which our doctrine of Ideas differs very much from that of Plato.
He teaches (De Rep., x., p. 288) that the object which art tries to
express, the ideal of painting and poetry, is not the Idea but the
particular thing. Our whole exposition hitherto has maintained exactly the
opposite, and Plato’s opinion is the less likely to lead us astray,
inasmuch as it is the source of one of the greatest and best known errors
of this great man, his depreciation and rejection of art, and especially
poetry; he directly connects his false judgment in reference to this with
the passage quoted.

§ 42. I return to the exposition of the æsthetic impression. The knowledge
of the beautiful always supposes at once and inseparably the pure knowing
subject and the known Idea as object. Yet the source of æsthetic
satisfaction will sometimes lie more in the comprehension of the known
Idea, sometimes more in the blessedness and spiritual peace of the pure
knowing subject freed from all willing, and therefore from all
individuality, and the pain that proceeds from it. And, indeed, this
predominance of one or the other constituent part of æsthetic feeling will
depend upon whether the intuitively grasped Idea is a higher or a lower
grade of the objectivity of will. Thus in æsthetic contemplation (in the
real, or through the medium of art) of the beauty of nature in the
inorganic and vegetable worlds, or in works of architecture, the pleasure
of pure will-less knowing will predominate, because the Ideas which are
here apprehended are only low grades of the objectivity of will, and are
therefore not manifestations of deep significance and rich content. On the
other hand, if animals and man are the objects of æsthetic contemplation
or representation, the pleasure will consist rather in the comprehension
of these Ideas, which are the most distinct revelation of will; for they
exhibit the greatest multiplicity of forms, the greatest richness and deep
significance of phenomena, and reveal to us most completely the nature of
will, whether in its violence, its terribleness, its satisfaction or its
aberration (the latter in tragic situations), or finally in its change and
self-surrender, which is the peculiar theme of christian painting; as the
Idea of the will enlightened by full knowledge is the object of historical
painting in general, and of the drama. We shall now go through the fine
arts one by one, and this will give completeness and distinctness to the
theory of the beautiful which we have advanced.

§ 43. Matter as such cannot be the expression of an Idea. For, as we found
in the first book, it is throughout nothing but causality: its being
consists in its casual action. But causality is a form of the principle of
sufficient reason; knowledge of the Idea, on the other hand, absolutely
excludes the content of that principle. We also found, in the second book,
that matter is the common substratum of all particular phenomena of the
Ideas, and consequently is the connecting link between the Idea and the
phenomenon, or the particular thing. Accordingly for both of these reasons
it is impossible that matter can for itself express any Idea. This is
confirmed a posteriori by the fact that it is impossible to have a
perceptible idea of matter as such, but only an abstract conception; in
the former, i.e., in perceptible ideas are exhibited only the forms and
qualities of which matter is the supporter, and in all of which Ideas
reveal themselves. This corresponds also with the fact, that causality
(the whole essence of matter) cannot for itself be presented perceptibly,
but is merely a definite casual connection. On the other hand, every
phenomenon of an Idea, because as such it has entered the form of the
principle of sufficient reason, or the principium individuationis, must
exhibit itself in matter, as one of its qualities. So far then matter is,
as we have said, the connecting link between the Idea and the principium
individuationis, which is the form of knowledge of the individual, or the
principle of sufficient reason. Plato is therefore perfectly right in his
enumeration, for after the Idea and the phenomenon, which include all
other things in the world, he gives matter only, as a third thing which is
different from both (Timaus, p. 345). The individual, as a phenomenon of
the Idea, is always matter. Every quality of matter is also the phenomenon
of an Idea, and as such it may always be an object of æsthetic
contemplation, i.e., the Idea expressed in it may always be recognised.
This holds good of even the most universal qualities of matter, without
which it never appears, and which are the weakest objectivity of will.
Such are gravity, cohesion, rigidity, fluidity, sensitiveness to light,
and so forth.

If now we consider architecture simply as a fine art and apart from its
application to useful ends, in which it serves the will and not pure
knowledge, and therefore ceases to be art in our sense; we can assign to
it no other aim than that of bringing to greater distinctness some of
those ideas, which are the lowest grades of the objectivity of will; such
as gravity, cohesion, rigidity, hardness, those universal qualities of
stone, those first, simplest, most inarticulate manifestations of will;
the bass notes of nature; and after these light, which in many respects is
their opposite. Even at these low grades of the objectivity of will we see
its nature revealing itself in discord; for properly speaking the conflict
between gravity and rigidity is the sole æsthetic material of
architecture; its problem is to make this conflict appear with perfect
distinctness in a multitude of different ways. It solves it by depriving
these indestructible forces of the shortest way to their satisfaction, and
conducting them to it by a circuitous route, so that the conflict is
lengthened and the inexhaustible efforts of both forces become visible in
many different ways. The whole mass of the building, if left to its
original tendency, would exhibit a mere heap or clump, bound as closely as
possible to the earth, to which gravity, the form in which the will
appears here, continually presses, while rigidity, also objectivity of
will, resists. But this very tendency, this effort, is hindered by
architecture from obtaining direct satisfaction, and only allowed to reach
it indirectly and by roundabout ways. The roof, for example, can only
press the earth through columns, the arch must support itself, and can
only satisfy its tendency towards the earth through the medium of the
pillars, and so forth. But just by these enforced digressions, just by
these restrictions, the forces which reside in the crude mass of stone
unfold themselves in the most distinct and multifarious ways; and the
purely æsthetic aim of architecture can go no further than this. Therefore
the beauty, at any rate, of a building lies in the obvious adaptation of
every part, not to the outward arbitrary end of man (so far the work
belongs to practical architecture), but directly to the stability of the
whole, to which the position, dimensions, and form of every part must have
so necessary a relation that, where it is possible, if any one part were
taken away, the whole would fall to pieces. For just because each part
bears just as much as it conveniently can, and each is supported just
where it requires to be and just to the necessary extent, this opposition
unfolds itself, this conflict between rigidity and gravity, which
constitutes the life, the manifestation of will, in the stone, becomes
completely visible, and these lowest grades of the objectivity of will
reveal themselves distinctly. In the same way the form of each part must
not be determined arbitrarily, but by its end, and its relation to the
whole. The column is the simplest form of support, determined simply by
its end: the twisted column is tasteless; the four-cornered pillar is in
fact not so simple as the round column, though it happens that it is
easier to make it. The forms also of frieze, rafter, roof, and dome are
entirely determined by their immediate end, and explain themselves from
it. The decoration of capitals, &c., belongs to sculpture, not to
architecture, which admits it merely as extraneous ornament, and could
dispense with it. According to what has been said, it is absolutely
necessary, in order to understand the æsthetic satisfaction afforded by a
work of architecture, to have immediate knowledge through perception of
its matter as regards its weight, rigidity, and cohesion, and our pleasure
in such a work would suddenly be very much diminished by the discovery
that the material used was pumice-stone; for then it would appear to us as
a kind of sham building. We would be affected in almost the same way if we
were told that it was made of wood, when we had supposed it to be of
stone, just because this alters and destroys the relation between rigidity
and gravity, and consequently the significance and necessity of all the
parts, for these natural forces reveal themselves in a far weaker degree
in a wooden building. Therefore no real work of architecture as a fine art
can be made of wood, although it assumes all forms so easily; this can
only be explained by our theory. If we were distinctly told that a
building, the sight of which gave us pleasure, was made of different kinds
of material of very unequal weight and consistency, but not
distinguishable to the eye, the whole building would become as utterly
incapable of affording us pleasure as a poem in an unknown language. All
this proves that architecture does not affect us mathematically, but also
dynamically, and that what speaks to us through it, is not mere form and
symmetry, but rather those fundamental forces of nature, those first
Ideas, those lowest grades of the objectivity of will. The regularity of
the building and its parts is partly produced by the direct adaptation of
each member to the stability of the whole, partly it serves to facilitate
the survey and comprehension of the whole, and finally, regular figures to
some extent enhance the beauty because they reveal the constitution of
space as such. But all this is of subordinate value and necessity, and by
no means the chief concern; indeed, symmetry is not invariably demanded,
as ruins are still beautiful.

Works of architecture have further quite a special relation to light; they
gain a double beauty in the full sunshine, with the blue sky as a
background, and again they have quite a different effect by moonlight.
Therefore, when a beautiful work of architecture is to be erected, special
attention is always paid to the effects of the light and to the climate.
The reason of all this is, indeed, principally that all the parts and
their relations are only made clearly visible by a bright, strong light;
but besides this I am of opinion that it is the function of architecture
to reveal the nature of light just as it reveals that of things so
opposite to it as gravity and rigidity. For the light is intercepted,
confined, and reflected by the great opaque, sharply outlined, and
variously formed masses of stone, and thus it unfolds its nature and
qualities in the purest and clearest way, to the great pleasure of the
beholders, for light is the most joy-giving of things, as the condition
and the objective correlative of the most perfect kind of knowledge of
perception.

Now, because the Ideas which architecture brings to clear perception, are
the lowest grades of the objectivity of will, and consequently their
objective significance, which architecture reveals to us, is comparatively
small; the æsthetic pleasure of looking at a beautiful building in a good
light will lie, not so much in the comprehension of the Idea, as in the
subjective correlative which accompanies this comprehension; it will
consist pre-eminently in the fact that the beholder, set free from the
kind of knowledge that belongs to the individual, and which serves the
will and follows the principle of sufficient reason, is raised to that of
the pure subject of knowing free from will. It will consist then
principally in pure contemplation itself, free from all the suffering of
will and of individuality. In this respect the opposite of architecture,
and the other extreme of the series of the fine arts, is the drama, which
brings to knowledge the most significant Ideas. Therefore in the æsthetic
pleasure afforded by the drama the objective side is throughout
predominant.

Architecture has this distinction from plastic art and poetry: it does not
give us a copy but the thing itself. It does not repeat, as they do, the
known Idea, so that the artist lends his eyes to the beholder, but in it
the artist merely presents the object to the beholder, and facilitates for
him the comprehension of the Idea by bringing the actual, individual
object to a distinct and complete expression of its nature.

Unlike the works of the other arts, those of architecture are very seldom
executed for purely æsthetic ends. These are generally subordinated to
other useful ends which are foreign to art itself. Thus the great merit of
the architect consists in achieving and attaining the pure æsthetic ends,
in spite of their subordination to other ends which are foreign to them.
This he does by cleverly adapting them in a variety of ways to the
arbitrary ends in view, and by rightly judging which form of æsthetical
architectonic beauty is compatible and may be associated with a temple,
which with a palace, which with a prison, and so forth. The more a harsh
climate increases these demands of necessity and utility, determines them
definitely, and prescribes them more inevitably, the less free play has
beauty in architecture. In the mild climate of India, Egypt, Greece, and
Rome, where the demands of necessity were fewer and less definite,
architecture could follow its æsthetic ends with the greatest freedom. But
under a northern sky this was sorely hindered. Here, when caissons,
pointed roofs and towers were what was demanded, architecture could only
unfold its own beauty within very narrow limits, and therefore it was
obliged to make amends by resorting all the more to the borrowed ornaments
of sculpture, as is seen in Gothic architecture.

We thus see that architecture is greatly restricted by the demands of
necessity and utility; but on the other hand it has in them a very
powerful support, for, on account of the magnitude and costliness of its
works, and the narrow sphere of its æsthetic effect, it could not continue
to exist merely as a fine art, if it had not also, as a useful and
necessary profession, a firm and honourable place among the occupations of
men. It is the want of this that prevents another art from taking its
place beside architecture as a sister art, although in an æsthetical point
of view it is quite properly to be classed along with it as its
counterpart; I mean artistic arrangements of water. For what architecture
accomplishes for the Idea of gravity when it appears in connection with
that of rigidity, hydraulics accomplishes for the same Idea, when it is
connected with fluidity, i.e., formlessness, the greatest mobility and
transparency. Leaping waterfalls foaming and tumbling over rocks,
cataracts dispersed into floating spray, springs gushing up as high
columns of water, and clear reflecting lakes, reveal the Ideas of fluid
and heavy matter, in precisely the same way as the works of architecture
unfold the Ideas of rigid matter. Artistic hydraulics, however, obtains no
support from practical hydraulics, for, as a rule, their ends cannot be
combined; yet, in exceptional cases, this happens; for example, in the
Cascata di Trevi at Rome.(52)

§ 44. What the two arts we have spoken of accomplish for these lowest
grades of the objectivity of will, is performed for the higher grades of
vegetable nature by artistic horticulture. The landscape beauty of a scene
consists, for the most part, in the multiplicity of natural objects which
are present in it, and then in the fact that they are clearly separated,
appear distinctly, and yet exhibit a fitting connection and alternation.
These two conditions are assisted and promoted by landscape-gardening, but
it has by no means such a mastery over its material as architecture, and
therefore its effect is limited. The beauty with which it is concerned
belongs almost exclusively to nature; it has done little for it; and, on
the other hand, it can do little against unfavourable nature, and when
nature works, not for it, but against it, its achievements are small.

The vegetable world offers itself everywhere for æsthetic enjoyment
without the medium of art; but so far as it is an object of art, it
belongs principally to landscape-painting; to the province of which all
the rest of unconscious nature also belongs. In paintings of still life,
and of mere architecture, ruins, interiors of churches, &c., the
subjective side of æsthetic pleasure is predominant, i.e., our
satisfaction does not lie principally in the direct comprehension of the
represented Ideas, but rather in the subjective correlative of this
comprehension, pure, will-less knowing. For, because the painter lets us
see these things through his eyes, we at once receive a sympathetic and
reflected sense of the deep spiritual peace and absolute silence of the
will, which were necessary in order to enter with knowledge so entirely
into these lifeless objects, and comprehend them with such love, i.e.,
in this case with such a degree of objectivity. The effect of
landscape-painting proper is indeed, as a whole, of this kind; but because
the Ideas expressed are more distinct and significant, as higher grades of
the objectivity of will, the objective side of æsthetic pleasure already
comes more to the front and assumes as much importance as the subjective
side. Pure knowing as such is no longer the paramount consideration, for
we are equally affected by the known Platonic Idea, the world as idea at
an important grade of the objectification of will.

But a far higher grade is revealed by animal painting and sculpture. Of
the latter we have some important antique remains; for example, horses at
Venice, on Monte Cavallo, and on the Elgin Marbles, also at Florence in
bronze and marble; the ancient boar, howling wolves, the lions in the
arsenal at Venice, also in the Vatican a whole room almost filled with
ancient animals, &c. In these representations the objective side of
æsthetic pleasure obtains a marked predominance over the subjective. The
peace of the subject which knows these Ideas, which has silenced its own
will, is indeed present, as it is in all æsthetic contemplation; but its
effect is not felt, for we are occupied with the restlessness and
impetuosity of the will represented. It is that very will, which
constitutes our own nature, that here appears to us in forms, in which its
manifestation is not, as in us, controlled and tempered by intellect, but
exhibits itself in stronger traits, and with a distinctness that borders
on the grotesque and monstrous. For this very reason there is no
concealment; it is free, naïve, open as the day, and this is the cause of
our interest in animals. The characteristics of species appeared already
in the representation of plants, but showed itself only in the forms; here
it becomes much more distinct, and expresses itself not only in the form,
but in the action, position, and mien, yet always merely as the character
of the species, not of the individual. This knowledge of the Ideas of
higher grades, which in painting we receive through extraneous means, we
may gain directly by the pure contemplative perception of plants, and
observation of beasts, and indeed of the latter in their free, natural,
and unrestrained state. The objective contemplation of their manifold and
marvellous forms, and of their actions and behaviour, is an instructive
lesson from the great book of nature, it is a deciphering of the true
signatura rerum.(53) We see in them the manifold grades and modes of the
manifestation of will, which in all beings of one and the same grade,
wills always in the same way, which objectifies itself as life, as
existence in such endless variety, and such different forms, which are all
adaptations to the different external circumstances, and may be compared
to many variations on the same theme. But if we had to communicate to the
observer, for reflection, and in a word, the explanation of their inner
nature, it would be best to make use of that Sanscrit formula which occurs
so often in the sacred books of the Hindoos, and is called Mahavakya,
i.e., the great word: “Tat twam asi,” which means, “this living thing
art thou.”

§ 45. The great problem of historical painting and sculpture is to express
directly and for perception the Idea in which the will reaches the highest
grade of its objectification. The objective side of the pleasure afforded
by the beautiful is here always predominant, and the subjective side has
retired into the background. It is further to be observed that at the next
grade below this, animal painting, the characteristic is entirely one with
the beautiful; the most characteristic lion, wolf, horse, sheep, or ox,
was always the most beautiful also. The reason of this is that animals
have only the character of their species, no individual character. In the
representation of men the character of the species is separated from that
of the individual; the former is now called beauty (entirely in the
objective sense), but the latter retains the name, character, or
expression, and the new difficulty arises of representing both, at once
and completely, in the same individual.

Human beauty is an objective expression, which means the fullest
objectification of will at the highest grade at which it is knowable, the
Idea of man in general, completely expressed in the sensible form. But
however much the objective side of the beautiful appears here, the
subjective side still always accompanies it. And just because no object
transports us so quickly into pure æsthetic contemplation, as the most
beautiful human countenance and form, at the sight of which we are
instantly filled with unspeakable satisfaction, and raised above ourselves
and all that troubles us; this is only possible because this most distinct
and purest knowledge of will raises us most easily and quickly to the
state of pure knowing, in which our personality, our will with its
constant pain, disappears, so long as the pure æsthetic pleasure lasts.
Therefore it is that Goethe says: “No evil can touch him who looks on
human beauty; he feels himself at one with himself and with the world.”
That a beautiful human form is produced by nature must be explained in
this way. At this its highest grade the will objectifies itself in an
individual; and therefore through circumstances and its own power it
completely overcomes all the hindrances and opposition which the phenomena
of the lower grades present to it. Such are the forces of nature, from
which the will must always first extort and win back the matter that
belongs to all its manifestations. Further, the phenomenon of will at its
higher grades always has multiplicity in its form. Even the tree is only a
systematic aggregate of innumerably repeated sprouting fibres. This
combination assumes greater complexity in higher forms, and the human body
is an exceedingly complex system of different parts, each of which has a
peculiar life of its own, vita propria, subordinate to the whole. Now
that all these parts are in the proper fashion subordinate to the whole,
and co-ordinate to each other, that they all work together harmoniously
for the expression of the whole, nothing superfluous, nothing restricted;
all these are the rare conditions, whose result is beauty, the completely
expressed character of the species. So is it in nature. But how in art?
One would suppose that art achieved the beautiful by imitating nature. But
how is the artist to recognise the perfect work which is to be imitated,
and distinguish it from the failures, if he does not anticipate the
beautiful before experience? And besides this, has nature ever produced
a human being perfectly beautiful in all his parts? It has accordingly
been thought that the artist must seek out the beautiful parts,
distributed among a number of different human beings, and out of them
construct a beautiful whole; a perverse and foolish opinion. For it will
be asked, how is he to know that just these forms and not others are
beautiful? We also see what kind of success attended the efforts of the
old German painters to achieve the beautiful by imitating nature. Observe
their naked figures. No knowledge of the beautiful is possible purely a
posteriori, and from mere experience; it is always, at least in part, a
priori, although quite different in kind, from the forms of the principle
of sufficient reason, of which we are conscious a priori. These concern
the universal form of phenomena as such, as it constitutes the possibility
of knowledge in general, the universal how of all phenomena, and from
this knowledge proceed mathematics and pure natural science. But this
other kind of knowledge a priori, which makes it possible to express the
beautiful, concerns, not the form but the content of phenomena, not the
how but the what of the phenomenon. That we all recognise human beauty
when we see it, but that in the true artist this takes place with such
clearness that he shows it as he has never seen it, and surpasses nature
in his representation; this is only possible because we ourselves are
the will whose adequate objectification at its highest grade is here to be
judged and discovered. Thus alone have we in fact an anticipation of that
which nature (which is just the will that constitutes our own being)
strives to express. And in the true genius this anticipation is
accompanied by so great a degree of intelligence that he recognises the
Idea in the particular thing, and thus, as it were, understands the
half-uttered speech of nature, and articulates clearly what she only
stammered forth. He expresses in the hard marble that beauty of form which
in a thousand attempts she failed to produce, he presents it to nature,
saying, as it were, to her, “That is what you wanted to say!” And whoever
is able to judge replies, “Yes, that is it.” Only in this way was it
possible for the genius of the Greeks to find the type of human beauty and
establish it as a canon for the school of sculpture; and only by virtue of
such an anticipation is it possible for all of us to recognise beauty,
when it has actually been achieved by nature in the particular case. This
anticipation is the Ideal. It is the Idea so far as it is known a
priori, at least half, and it becomes practical for art, because it
corresponds to and completes what is given a posteriori through nature.
The possibility of such an anticipation of the beautiful a priori in the
artist, and of its recognition a posteriori by the critic, lies in the
fact that the artist and the critic are themselves the “in-itself” of
nature, the will which objectifies itself. For, as Empedocles said, like
can only be known by like: only nature can understand itself: only nature
can fathom itself: but only spirit also can understand spirit.(54)

The opinion, which is absurd, although expressed by the Socrates of
Xenophon (Stobæi Floril, vol. ii. p. 384) that the Greeks discovered the
established ideal of human beauty empirically, by collecting particular
beautiful parts, uncovering and noting here a knee, there an arm, has an
exact parallel in the art of poetry. The view is entertained, that
Shakespeare, for example, observed, and then gave forth from his own
experience of life, the innumerable variety of the characters in his
dramas, so true, so sustained, so profoundly worked out. The impossibility
and absurdity of such an assumption need not be dwelt upon. It is obvious
that the man of genius produces the works of poetic art by means of an
anticipation of what is characteristic, just as he produces the works of
plastic and pictorial art by means of a prophetic anticipation of the
beautiful; yet both require experience as a pattern or model, for thus
alone can that which is dimly known a priori be called into clear
consciousness, and an intelligent representation of it becomes possible.

Human beauty was explained above as the fullest objectification of will at
the highest grade at which it is knowable. It expresses itself through the
form; and this lies in space alone, and has no necessary connection with
time, as, for example, motion has. Thus far then we may say: the adequate
objectification of will through a merely spatial phenomenon is beauty, in
the objective sense. A plant is nothing but such a merely spatial
phenomenon of will; for no motion, and consequently no relation to time
(regarded apart from its development), belongs to the expression of its
nature; its mere form expresses its whole being and displays it openly.
But brutes and men require, further, for the full revelation of the will
which is manifested in them, a series of actions, and thus the
manifestation in them takes on a direct relation to time. All this has
already been explained in the preceding book; it is related to what we are
considering at present in the following way. As the merely spatial
manifestation of will can objectify it fully or defectively at each
definite grade,—and it is this which constitutes beauty or ugliness,—so
the temporal objectification of will, i.e., the action, and indeed the
direct action, the movement, may correspond to the will, which objectifies
itself in it, purely and fully without foreign admixture, without
superfluity, without defect, only expressing exactly the act of will
determined in each case;—or the converse of all this may occur. In the
first case the movement is made with grace, in the second case without
it. Thus as beauty is the adequate representation of will generally,
through its merely spatial manifestation; grace is the adequate
representation of will through its temporal manifestation, that is to say,
the perfectly accurate and fitting expression of each act of will, through
the movement and position which objectify it. Since movement and position
presuppose the body, Winckelmann’s expression is very true and suitable,
when he says, “Grace is the proper relation of the acting person to the
action” (Works, vol. i. p. 258). It is thus evident that beauty may be
attributed to a plant, but no grace, unless in a figurative sense; but to
brutes and men, both beauty and grace. Grace consists, according to what
has been said, in every movement being performed, and every position
assumed, in the easiest, most appropriate and convenient way, and
therefore being the pure, adequate expression of its intention, or of the
act of will, without any superfluity, which exhibits itself as aimless,
meaningless bustle, or as wooden stiffness. Grace presupposes as its
condition a true proportion of all the limbs, and a symmetrical,
harmonious figure; for complete ease and evident appropriateness of all
positions and movements are only possible by means of these. Grace is
therefore never without a certain degree of beauty of person. The two,
complete and united, are the most distinct manifestation of will at the
highest grade of its objectification.

It was mentioned above that in order rightly to portray man, it is
necessary to separate the character of the species from that of the
individual, so that to a certain extent every man expresses an Idea
peculiar to himself, as was said in the last book. Therefore the arts
whose aim is the representation of the Idea of man, have as their problem,
not only beauty, the character of the species, but also the character of
the individual, which is called, par excellence, character. But this
is only the case in so far as this character is to be regarded, not as
something accidental and quite peculiar to the man as a single individual,
but as a side of the Idea of humanity which is specially apparent in this
individual, and the representation of which is therefore of assistance in
revealing this Idea. Thus the character, although as such it is
individual, must yet be Ideal, that is, its significance in relation to
the Idea of humanity generally (the objectifying of which it assists in
its own way) must be comprehended and expressed with special prominence.
Apart from this the representation is a portrait, a copy of the individual
as such, with all his accidental qualities. And even the portrait ought to
be, as Winckelmann says, the ideal of the individual.

That character which is to be ideally comprehended, as the prominence of
a special side of the Idea of humanity, expresses itself visibly, partly
through permanent physiognomy and bodily form, partly through passing
emotion and passion, the reciprocal modification of knowing and willing by
each other, which is all exhibited in the mien and movements. Since the
individual always belongs to humanity, and, on the other hand, humanity
always reveals itself in the individual with what is indeed peculiar ideal
significance, beauty must not be destroyed by character nor character by
beauty. For if the character of the species is annulled by that of the
individual, the result is caricature; and if the character of the
individual is annulled by that of the species, the result is an absence of
meaning. Therefore the representation which aims at beauty, as sculpture
principally does, will yet always modify this (the character of the
species), in some respect, by the individual character, and will always
express the Idea of man in a definite individual manner, giving prominence
to a special side of it. For the human individual as such has to a certain
extent the dignity of a special Idea, and it is essential to the Idea of
man that it should express itself in individuals of special significance.
Therefore we find in the works of the ancients, that the beauty distinctly
comprehended by them, is not expressed in one form, but in many forms of
different character. It is always apprehended, as it were, from a
different side, and expressed in one way in Apollo, in another way in
Bacchus, in another in Hercules, in another in Antinous; indeed the
characteristic may limit the beautiful, and finally extend even to
hideousness, in the drunken Silenus, in the Faun, &c. If the
characteristic goes so far as actually to annul the character of the
species, if it extends to the unnatural, it becomes caricature. But we can
far less afford to allow grace to be interfered with by what is
characteristic than even beauty, for graceful position and movement are
demanded for the expression of the character also; but yet it must be
achieved in the way which is most fitting, appropriate, and easy for the
person. This will be observed, not only by the sculptor and the painter,
but also by every good actor; otherwise caricature will appear here also
as grimace or distortion.

In sculpture, beauty and grace are the principal concern. The special
character of the mind, appearing in emotion, passion, alternations of
knowing and willing, which can only be represented by the expression of
the countenance and the gestures, is the peculiar sphere of painting.
For although eyes and colour, which lie outside the province of sculpture,
contribute much to beauty, they are yet far more essential to character.
Further, beauty unfolds itself more completely when it is contemplated
from various points of view; but the expression, the character, can only
be completely comprehended from one point of view.

Because beauty is obviously the chief aim of sculpture, Lessing tried to
explain the fact that the Laocoon does not cry out, by saying that
crying out is incompatible with beauty. The Laocoon formed for Lessing the
theme, or at least the text of a work of his own, and both before and
after him a great deal has been written on the subject. I may therefore be
allowed to express my views about it in passing, although so special a
discussion does not properly belong to the scheme of this work, which is
throughout concerned with what is general.

§ 46. That Laocoon, in the celebrated group, does not cry out is obvious,
and the universal and ever-renewed surprise at this must be occasioned by
the fact that any of us would cry out if we were in his place. And nature
demands that it should be so; for in the case of the acutest physical
pain, and the sudden seizure by the greatest bodily fear, all reflection,
that might have inculcated silent endurance, is entirely expelled from
consciousness, and nature relieves itself by crying out, thus expressing
both the pain and the fear, summoning the deliverer and terrifying the
assailer. Thus Winckelmann missed the expression of crying out; but as he
wished to justify the artist he turned Laocoon into a Stoic, who
considered it beneath his dignity to cry out secundum naturam, but added
to his pain the useless constraint of suppressing all utterance of it.
Winckelmann therefore sees in him “the tried spirit of a great man, who
writhes in agony, and yet seeks to suppress the utterance of his feeling,
and to lock it up in himself. He does not break forth into loud cries, as
in Virgil, but only anxious sighs escape him,” &c. (Works, vol. vii. p.
98, and at greater length in vol. vi. p. 104). Now Lessing criticised this
opinion of Winckelmann’s in his Laocoon, and improved it in the way
mentioned above. In place of the psychological he gave the purely æsthetic
reason that beauty, the principle of ancient art, does not admit of the
expression of crying out. Another argument which he added to this, that a
merely passing state incapable of duration ought not to be represented in
motionless works of art, has a hundred examples of most excellent figures
against it, which are fixed in merely transitory movements, dancing,
wrestling, catching, &c. Indeed Goethe, in the essay on the Laocoon, which
opens the Propylaen (p. 8), holds that the choice of such a merely
fleeting movement is absolutely necessary. In our own day Hirt (Horen,
1797, tenth St.) finally decided the point, deducing everything from the
highest truth of expression, that Laocoon does not cry out, because he can
no longer do so, as he is at the point of death from choking. Lastly,
Fernow (“Römische Studien,” vol. i. p. 246) expounded and weighed all
these opinions; he added, however, no new one of his own, but combined
these three eclectically.

I cannot but wonder that such thoughtful and acute men should laboriously
bring far-fetched and insufficient reasons, should resort to psychological
and physiological arguments, to explain a matter the reason of which lies
so near at hand, and is obvious at once to the unprejudiced; and
especially I wonder that Lessing, who came so near the true explanation,
should yet have entirely missed the real point.

Before all psychological and physiological inquiries as to whether Laocoon
would cry out in his position or not (and I certainly affirm that he
would), it must be decided as regards the group in question, that crying
out ought not to be expressed in it, for the simple reason that its
expression lies quite outside the province of sculpture. A shrieking
Laocoon could not be produced in marble, but only a figure with the mouth
open vainly endeavouring to shriek; a Laocoon whose voice has stuck in his
throat, vox faucibus haesit. The essence of shrieking, and consequently
its effect upon the onlooker, lies entirely in sound; not in the
distortion of the mouth. This phenomenon, which necessarily accompanies
shrieking, derives motive and justification only from the sound produced
by means of it; then it is permissible and indeed necessary, as
characteristic of the action, even though it interferes with beauty. But
in plastic art, to which the representation of shrieking is quite foreign
and impossible, it would be actual folly to represent the medium of
violent shrieking, the distorted mouth, which would disturb all the
features and the remainder of the expression; for thus at the sacrifice of
many other things the means would be represented, while its end, the
shrieking itself, and its effect upon our feelings, would be left out. Nay
more, there would be produced the spectacle of a continuous effort without
effect, which is always ridiculous, and may really be compared to what
happened when some one for a joke stopped the horn of a night watchman
with wax while he was asleep, and then awoke him with the cry of fire, and
amused himself by watching his vain endeavours to blow the horn. When, on
the other hand, the expression of shrieking lies in the province of poetic
or histrionic art, it is quite admissible, because it helps to express the
truth, i.e., the complete expression of the Idea. Thus it is with
poetry, which claims the assistance of the imagination of the reader, in
order to enable it to represent things perceptibly. Therefore Virgil makes
Laocoon cry out like the bellowing of an ox that has broken loose after
being struck by the axe; and Homer (Il. xx. 48-53) makes Mars and Minerva
shriek horribly, without derogating from their divine dignity or beauty.
The same with acting; Laocoon on the stage would certainly have to shriek.
Sophocles makes Philoctetus cry out, and, on the ancient stage at any
rate, he must actually have done so. As a case in point, I remember having
seen in London the great actor Kemble play in a piece called Pizarro,
translated from the German. He took the part of the American, a
half-savage, but of very noble character. When he was wounded he cried out
loudly and wildly, which had a great and admirable effect, for it was
exceedingly characteristic and therefore assisted the truth of the
representation very much. On the other hand, a painted or sculptured model
of a man shrieking, would be much more absurd than the painted music which
is censured in Goethe’s Propylaen. For shrieking does far more injury to
the expression and beauty of the whole than music, which at the most only
occupies the hands and arms, and is to be looked upon as an occupation
characteristic of the person; indeed thus far it may quite rightly be
painted, as long as it demands no violent movement of the body, or
distortion of the mouth: for example, St. Cecilia at the organ, Raphael’s
violin-player in the Sciarra Gallery at Rome, and others. Since then, on
account of the limits of the art, the pain of Laocoon must not be
expressed by shrieking, the artist was obliged to employ every other
expression of pain; this he has done in the most perfect manner, as is
ably described by Winckelmann (Works, vol. vi. p. 104), whose admirable
account thus retains its full value and truth, as soon as we abstract from
the stoical view which underlies it.(55)

§ 47. Because beauty accompanied with grace is the principal object of
sculpture, it loves nakedness, and allows clothing only so far as it does
not conceal the form. It makes use of drapery, not as a covering, but as a
means of exhibiting the form, a method of exposition that gives much
exercise to the understanding, for it can only arrive at a perception of
the cause, the form of the body, through the only directly given effect,
the drapery. Thus to a certain extent drapery is in sculpture what
fore-shortening is in painting. Both are suggestions, yet not symbolical,
but such that, if they are successful, they force the understanding
directly to perceive what is suggested, just as if it were actually given.

I may be allowed, in passing, to insert here a comparison that is very
pertinent to the arts we are discussing. It is this: as the beautiful
bodily form is seen to the greatest advantage when clothed in the lightest
way, or indeed without any clothing at all, and therefore a very handsome
man, if he had also taste and the courage to follow it, would go about
almost naked, clothed only after the manner of the ancients; so every one
who possesses a beautiful and rich mind will always express himself in the
most natural, direct, and simple way, concerned, if it be possible, to
communicate his thoughts to others, and thus relieve the loneliness that
he must feel in such a world as this. And conversely, poverty of mind,
confusion, and perversity of thought, will clothe itself in the most
far-fetched expressions and the obscurest forms of speech, in order to
wrap up in difficult and pompous phraseology small, trifling, insipid, or
commonplace thoughts; like a man who has lost the majesty of beauty, and
trying to make up for the deficiency by means of clothing, seeks to hide
the insignificance or ugliness of his person under barbaric finery,
tinsel, feathers, ruffles, cuffs, and mantles. Many an author, if
compelled to translate his pompous and obscure book into its little clear
content, would be as utterly spoilt as this man if he had to go naked.

§ 48. Historical painting has for its principal object, besides beauty
and grace, character. By character we mean generally, the representation
of will at the highest grade of its objectification, when the individual,
as giving prominence to a particular side of the Idea of humanity, has
special significance, and shows this not merely by his form, but makes it
visible in his bearing and occupation, by action of every kind, and the
modifications of knowing and willing that occasion and accompany it. The
Idea of man must be exhibited in these circumstances, and therefore the
unfolding of its many-sidedness must be brought before our eyes by means
of representative individuals, and these individuals can only be made
visible in their significance through various scenes, events, and actions.
This is the endless problem of the historical painter, and he solves it by
placing before us scenes of life of every kind, of greater or less
significance. No individual and no action can be without significance; in
all and through all the Idea of man unfolds itself more and more.
Therefore no event of human life is excluded from the sphere of painting.
It is thus a great injustice to the excellent painters of the Dutch
school, to prize merely their technical skill, and to look down upon them
in other respects, because, for the most part, they represent objects of
common life, whereas it is assumed that only the events of the history of
the world, or the incidents of biblical story, have significance. We ought
first to bethink ourselves that the inward significance of an action is
quite different from its outward significance, and that these are often
separated from each other. The outward significance is the importance of
an action in relation to its result for and in the actual world; thus
according to the principle of sufficient reason. The inward significance
is the depth of the insight into the Idea of man which it reveals, in that
it brings to light sides of that Idea which rarely appear, by making
individuals who assert themselves distinctly and decidedly, disclose their
peculiar characteristics by means of appropriately arranged circumstances.
Only the inward significance concerns art; the outward belongs to history.
They are both completely independent of each other; they may appear
together, but may each appear alone. An action which is of the highest
significance for history may in inward significance be a very ordinary and
common one; and conversely, a scene of ordinary daily life may be of great
inward significance, if human individuals, and the inmost recesses of
human action and will, appear in it in a clear and distinct light.
Further, the outward and the inward significance of a scene may be equal
and yet very different. Thus, for example, it is all the same, as far as
inward significance is concerned, whether ministers discuss the fate of
countries and nations over a map, or boors wrangle in a beer-house over
cards and dice, just as it is all the same whether we play chess with
golden or wooden pieces. But apart from this, the scenes and events that
make up the life of so many millions of men, their actions, their sorrows,
their joys, are on that account important enough to be the object of art,
and by their rich variety they must afford material enough for unfolding
the many-sided Idea of man. Indeed the very transitoriness of the moment
which art has fixed in such a picture (now called genre-painting)
excites a slight and peculiar sensation; for to fix the fleeting,
ever-changing world in the enduring picture of a single event, which yet
represents the whole, is an achievement of the art of painting by which it
seems to bring time itself to a standstill, for it raises the individual
to the Idea of its species. Finally, the historical and outwardly
significant subjects of painting have often the disadvantage that just
what is significant in them cannot be presented to perception, but must be
arrived at by thought. In this respect the nominal significance of the
picture must be distinguished from its real significance. The former is
the outward significance, which, however, can only be reached as a
conception; the latter is that side of the Idea of man which is made
visible to the onlooker in the picture. For example, Moses found by the
Egyptian princess is the nominal significance of a painting; it represents
a moment of the greatest importance in history; the real significance, on
the other hand, that which is really given to the onlooker, is a foundling
child rescued from its floating cradle by a great lady, an incident which
may have happened more than once. The costume alone can here indicate the
particular historical case to the learned; but the costume is only of
importance to the nominal significance, and is a matter of indifference to
the real significance; for the latter knows only the human being as such,
not the arbitrary forms. Subjects taken from history have no advantage
over those which are taken from mere possibility, and which are therefore
to be called, not individual, but merely general. For what is peculiarly
significant in the former is not the individual, not the particular event
as such, but the universal in it, the side of the Idea of humanity which
expresses itself through it. But, on the other hand, definite historical
subjects are not on this account to be rejected, only the really artistic
view of such subjects, both in the painter and in the beholder, is never
directed to the individual particulars in them, which properly constitute
the historical, but to the universal which expresses itself in them, to
the Idea. And only those historical subjects are to be chosen the chief
point of which can actually be represented, and not merely arrived at by
thought, otherwise the nominal significance is too remote from the real;
what is merely thought in connection with the picture becomes of most
importance, and interferes with what is perceived. If even on the stage it
is not right that the chief incident of the plot should take place behind
the scenes (as in French tragedies), it is clearly a far greater fault in
a picture. Historical subjects are distinctly disadvantageous only when
they confine the painter to a field which has not been chosen for artistic
but for other reasons, and especially when this field is poor in
picturesque and significant objects—if, for example, it is the history of
a small, isolated, capricious, hierarchical (i.e., ruled by error),
obscure people, like the Jews, despised by the great contemporary nations
of the East and the West. Since the wandering of the tribes lies between
us and all ancient nations, as the change of the bed of the ocean lies
between the earth’s surface as it is to-day and as it was when those
organisations existed which we only know from fossil remains, it is to be
regarded generally as a great misfortune that the people whose culture was
to be the principal basis of our own were not the Indians or the Greeks,
or even the Romans, but these very Jews. But it was especially a great
misfortune for the Italian painters of genius in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries that, in the narrow sphere to which they were
arbitrarily driven for the choice of subjects, they were obliged to have
recourse to miserable beings of every kind. For the New Testament, as
regards its historical part, is almost more unsuitable for painting than
the Old, and the subsequent history of martyrs and doctors of the church
is a very unfortunate subject. Yet of the pictures, whose subject is the
history or mythology of Judaism and Christianity, we must carefully
distinguish those in which the peculiar, i.e., the ethical spirit of
Christianity is revealed for perception, by the representation of men who
are full of this spirit. These representations are in fact the highest and
most admirable achievements of the art of painting; and only the greatest
masters of this art succeeded in this, particularly Raphael and Correggio,
and especially in their earlier pictures. Pictures of this kind are not
properly to be classed as historical: for, as a rule, they represent no
event, no action; but are merely groups of saints, with the Saviour
himself, often still a child, with His mother, angels, &c. In their
countenances, and especially in the eyes, we see the expression, the
reflection, of the completest knowledge, that which is not directed to
particular things, but has fully grasped the Ideas, and thus the whole
nature of the world and life. And this knowledge in them, reacting upon
the will, does not, like other knowledge, convey motives to it, but on
the contrary has become a quieter of all will, from which proceeded the
complete resignation, which is the innermost spirit of Christianity, as of
the Indian philosophy; the surrender of all volition, conversion, the
suppression of will, and with it of the whole inner being of this world,
that is to say, salvation. Thus these masters of art, worthy of eternal
praise, expressed perceptibly in their works the highest wisdom. And this
is the summit of all art. It has followed the will in its adequate
objectivity, the Ideas, through all its grades, in which it is affected
and its nature unfolded in so many ways, first by causes, then by stimuli,
and finally by motives. And now art ends with the representation of the
free self-suppression of will, by means of the great peace which it gains
from the perfect knowledge of its own nature.(56)

§ 49. The truth which lies at the foundation of all that we have hitherto
said about art, is that the object of art, the representation of which is
the aim of the artist, and the knowledge of which must therefore precede
his work as its germ and source, is an Idea in Plato’s sense, and never
anything else; not the particular thing, the object of common
apprehension, and not the concept, the object of rational thought and of
science. Although the Idea and the concept have something in common,
because both represent as unity a multiplicity of real things; yet the
great difference between them has no doubt been made clear and evident
enough by what we have said about concepts in the first book, and about
Ideas in this book. I by no means wish to assert, however, that Plato
really distinctly comprehended this difference; indeed many of his
examples of Ideas, and his discussions of them, are applicable only to
concepts. Meanwhile we leave this question alone and go on our own way,
glad when we come upon traces of any great and noble mind, yet not
following his footsteps but our own aim. The concept is abstract,
discursive, undetermined within its own sphere, only determined by its
limits, attainable and comprehensible by him who has only reason,
communicable by words without any other assistance, entirely exhausted by
its definition. The Idea on the contrary, although defined as the
adequate representative of the concept, is always object of perception,
and although representing an infinite number of particular things, is yet
thoroughly determined. It is never known by the individual as such, but
only by him who has raised himself above all willing and all individuality
to the pure subject of knowing. Thus it is only attainable by the man of
genius, and by him who, for the most part through the assistance of the
works of genius, has reached an exalted frame of mind, by increasing his
power of pure knowing. It is therefore not absolutely but only
conditionally communicable, because the Idea, comprehended and repeated in
the work of art, appeals to every one only according to the measure of his
own intellectual worth. So that just the most excellent works of every
art, the noblest productions of genius, must always remain sealed books to
the dull majority of men, inaccessible to them, separated from them by a
wide gulf, just as the society of princes is inaccessible to the common
people. It is true that even the dullest of them accept on authority
recognisedly great works, lest otherwise they should argue their own
incompetence; but they wait in silence, always ready to express their
condemnation, as soon as they are allowed to hope that they may do so
without being left to stand alone; and then their long-restrained hatred
against all that is great and beautiful, and against the authors of it,
gladly relieves itself; for such things never appealed to them, and for
that very reason were humiliating to them. For as a rule a man must have
worth in himself in order to recognise it and believe in it willingly and
freely in others. On this rests the necessity of modesty in all merit, and
the disproportionately loud praise of this virtue, which alone of all its
sisters is always included in the eulogy of every one who ventures to
praise any distinguished man, in order to appease and quiet the wrath of
the unworthy. What then is modesty but hypocritical humility, by means of
which, in a world swelling with base envy, a man seeks to obtain pardon
for excellences and merits from those who have none? For whoever
attributes to himself no merits, because he actually has none, is not
modest but merely honest.

The Idea is the unity that falls into multiplicity on account of the
temporal and spatial form of our intuitive apprehension; the concept, on
the contrary, is the unity reconstructed out of multiplicity by the
abstraction of our reason; the latter may be defined as unitas post rem,
the former as unitas ante rem. Finally, we may express the distinction
between the Idea and the concept, by a comparison, thus: the concept is
like a dead receptacle, in which, whatever has been put, actually lies
side by side, but out of which no more can be taken (by analytical
judgment) than was put in (by synthetical reflection); the (Platonic)
Idea, on the other hand, develops, in him who has comprehended it, ideas
which are new as regards the concept of the same name; it resembles a
living organism, developing itself and possessed of the power of
reproduction, which brings forth what was not put into it.

It follows from all that has been said, that the concept, useful as it is
in life, and serviceable, necessary and productive as it is in science, is
yet always barren and unfruitful in art. The comprehended Idea, on the
contrary, is the true and only source of every work of art. In its
powerful originality it is only derived from life itself, from nature,
from the world, and that only by the true genius, or by him whose
momentary inspiration reaches the point of genius. Genuine and immortal
works of art spring only from such direct apprehension. Just because the
Idea is and remains object of perception, the artist is not conscious in
the abstract of the intention and aim of his work; not a concept, but an
Idea floats before his mind; therefore he can give no justification of
what he does. He works, as people say, from pure feeling, and
unconsciously, indeed instinctively. On the contrary, imitators,
mannerists, imitatores, servum pecus, start, in art, from the concept;
they observe what pleases and affects us in true works of art; understand
it clearly, fix it in a concept, and thus abstractly, and then imitate it,
openly or disguisedly, with dexterity and intentionally. They suck their
nourishment, like parasite plants, from the works of others, and like
polypi, they become the colour of their food. We might carry comparison
further, and say that they are like machines which mince fine and mingle
together whatever is put into them, but can never digest it, so that the
different constituent parts may always be found again if they are sought
out and separated from the mixture; the man of genius alone resembles the
organised, assimilating, transforming and reproducing body. For he is
indeed educated and cultured by his predecessors and their works; but he
is really fructified only by life and the world directly, through the
impression of what he perceives; therefore the highest culture never
interferes with his originality. All imitators, all mannerists, apprehend
in concepts the nature of representative works of art; but concepts can
never impart inner life to a work. The age, i.e., the dull multitude of
every time, knows only concepts, and sticks to them, and therefore
receives mannered works of art with ready and loud applause: but after a
few years these works become insipid, because the spirit of the age,
i.e., the prevailing concepts, in which alone they could take root, have
changed. Only true works of art, which are drawn directly from nature and
life, have eternal youth and enduring power, like nature and life
themselves. For they belong to no age, but to humanity, and as on that
account they are coldly received by their own age, to which they disdain
to link themselves closely, and because indirectly and negatively they
expose the existing errors, they are slowly and unwillingly recognised; on
the other hand, they cannot grow old, but appear to us ever fresh and new
down to the latest ages. Then they are no longer exposed to neglect and
ignorance, for they are crowned and sanctioned by the praise of the few
men capable of judging, who appear singly and rarely in the course of
ages,(57) and give in their votes, whose slowly growing number constitutes
the authority, which alone is the judgment-seat we mean when we appeal to
posterity. It is these successively appearing individuals, for the mass of
posterity will always be and remain just as perverse and dull as the mass
of contemporaries always was and always is. We read the complaints of
great men in every century about the customs of their age. They always
sound as if they referred to our own age, for the race is always the same.
At every time and in every art, mannerisms have taken the place of the
spirit, which was always the possession of a few individuals, but
mannerisms are just the old cast-off garments of the last manifestation of
the spirit that existed and was recognised. From all this it appears that,
as a rule, the praise of posterity can only be gained at the cost of the
praise of one’s contemporaries, and vice versa.(58)

§ 50. If the aim of all art is the communication of the comprehended Idea,
which through the mind of the artist appears in such a form that it is
purged and isolated from all that is foreign to it, and may now be grasped
by the man of weaker comprehension and no productive faculty; if further,
it is forbidden in art to start from the concept, we shall not be able to
consent to the intentional and avowed employment of a work of art for the
expression of a concept; this is the case in the Allegory. An allegory
is a work of art which means something different from what it represents.
But the object of perception, and consequently also the Idea, expresses
itself directly and completely, and does not require the medium of
something else which implies or indicates it. Thus, that which in this way
is indicated and represented by something entirely different, because it
cannot itself be made object of perception, is always a concept. Therefore
through the allegory a conception has always to be signified, and
consequently the mind of the beholder has to be drawn away from the
expressed perceptible idea to one which is entirely different, abstract
and not perceptible, and which lies quite outside the work of art. The
picture or statue is intended to accomplish here what is accomplished far
more fully by a book. Now, what we hold is the end of art, representation
of a perceivable, comprehensible Idea, is not here the end. No great
completeness in the work of art is demanded for what is aimed at here. It
is only necessary that we should see what the thing is meant to be, for,
as soon as this has been discovered, the end is reached, and the mind is
now led away to quite a different kind of idea to an abstract conception,
which is the end that was in view. Allegories in plastic and pictorial art
are, therefore, nothing but hieroglyphics; the artistic value which they
may have as perceptible representations, belongs to them not as
allegories, but otherwise. That the “Night” of Correggio, the “Genius of
Fame” of Hannibal Caracci, and the “Hours” of Poussin, are very beautiful
pictures, is to be separated altogether from the fact that they are
allegories. As allegories they do not accomplish more than a legend,
indeed rather less. We are here again reminded of the distinction drawn
above between the real and the nominal significance of a picture. The
nominal is here the allegorical as such, for example, the “Genius of
Fame.” The real is what is actually represented, in this case a beautiful
winged youth, surrounded by beautiful boys; this expresses an Idea. But
this real significance affects us only so long as we forget the nominal,
allegorical significance; if we think of the latter, we forsake the
perception, and the mind is occupied with an abstract conception; but the
transition from the Idea to the conception is always a fall. Indeed, that
nominal significance, that allegorical intention, often injures the real
significance, the perceptible truth. For example, the unnatural light in
the “Night” of Correggio, which, though beautifully executed, has yet a
merely allegorical motive, and is really impossible. If then an
allegorical picture has artistic value, it is quite separate from and
independent of what it accomplishes as allegory. Such a work of art serves
two ends at once, the expression of a conception and the expression of an
Idea. Only the latter can be an end of art; the other is a foreign end,
the trifling amusement of making a picture also do service as a legend, as
a hieroglyphic, invented for the pleasure of those to whom the true nature
of art can never appeal. It is the same thing as when a work of art is
also a useful implement of some kind, in which case it also serves two
ends; for example, a statue which is at the same time a candelabrum or a
caryatide; or a bas-relief, which is also the shield of Achilles. True
lovers of art will allow neither the one nor the other. It is true that an
allegorical picture may, because of this quality, produce a vivid
impression upon the feelings; but when this is the case, a legend would
under the same circumstances produce the same effect. For example, if the
desire of fame were firmly and lastingly rooted in the heart of a man,
because he regarded it as his rightful possession, which is only withheld
from him so long as he has not produced the charter of his ownership; and
if the Genius of Fame, with his laurel crown, were to appear to such a
man, his whole mind would be excited, and his powers called into activity;
but the same effect would be produced if he were suddenly to see the word
“fame,” in large distinct letters on the wall. Or if a man has made known
a truth, which is of importance either as a maxim for practical life, or
as insight for science, but it has not been believed; an allegorical
picture representing time as it lifts the veil, and discloses the naked
figure of Truth, will affect him powerfully; but the same effect would be
produced by the legend: “Le temps découvre la vérité.” For what really
produces the effect here is the abstract thought, not the object of
perception.

If then, in accordance with what has been said, allegory in plastic and
pictorial art is a mistaken effort, serving an end which is entirely
foreign to art, it becomes quite unbearable when it leads so far astray
that the representation of forced and violently introduced subtilties
degenerates into absurdity. Such, for example, is a tortoise, to represent
feminine seclusion; the downward glance of Nemesis into the drapery of her
bosom, signifying that she can see into what is hidden; the explanation of
Bellori that Hannibal Carracci represents voluptuousness clothed in a
yellow robe, because he wishes to indicate that her lovers soon fade and
become yellow as straw. If there is absolutely no connection between the
representation and the conception signified by it, founded on subsumption
under the concept, or association of Ideas; but the signs and the things
signified are combined in a purely conventional manner, by positive,
accidentally introduced laws; then I call this degenerate kind of allegory
Symbolism. Thus the rose is the symbol of secrecy, the laurel is the
symbol of fame, the palm is the symbol of peace, the scallop-shell is the
symbol of pilgrimage, the cross is the symbol of the Christian religion.
To this class also belongs all significance of mere colour, as yellow is
the colour of falseness, and blue is the colour of fidelity. Such symbols
may often be of use in life, but their value is foreign to art. They are
simply to be regarded as hieroglyphics, or like Chinese word-writing, and
really belong to the same class as armorial bearings, the bush that
indicates a public-house, the key of the chamberlain, or the leather of
the mountaineer. If, finally, certain historical or mythical persons, or
personified conceptions, are represented by certain fixed symbols, these
are properly called emblems. Such are the beasts of the Evangelist, the
owl of Minerva, the apple of Paris, the Anchor of Hope, &c. For the most
part, however, we understand by emblems those simple allegorical
representations explained by a motto, which are meant to express a moral
truth, and of which large collections have been made by J. Camerarius,
Alciatus, and others. They form the transition to poetical allegory, of
which we shall have more to say later. Greek sculpture devotes itself to
the perception, and therefore it is æsthetical; Indian sculpture devotes
itself to the conception, and therefore it is merely symbolical.

This conclusion in regard to allegory, which is founded on our
consideration of the nature of art and quite consistent with it, is
directly opposed to the opinion of Winckelmann, who, far from explaining
allegory, as we do, as something quite foreign to the end of art, and
often interfering with it, always speaks in favour of it, and indeed
(Works, vol. i. p. 55) places the highest aim of art in the
“representation of universal conceptions, and non-sensuous things.” We
leave it to every one to adhere to whichever view he pleases. Only the
truth became very clear to me from these and similar views of Winckelmann
connected with his peculiar metaphysic of the beautiful, that one may have
the greatest susceptibility for artistic beauty, and the soundest judgment
in regard to it, without being able to give an abstract and strictly
philosophical justification of the nature of the beautiful; just as one
may be very noble and virtuous, and may have a tender conscience, which
decides with perfect accuracy in particular cases, without on that account
being in a position to investigate and explain in the abstract the ethical
significance of action.

Allegory has an entirely different relation to poetry from that which it
has to plastic and pictorial art, and although it is to be rejected in the
latter, it is not only permissible, but very serviceable to the former.
For in plastic and pictorial art it leads away from what is perceptibly
given, the proper object of all art, to abstract thoughts; but in poetry
the relation is reversed; for here what is directly given in words is the
concept, and the first aim is to lead from this to the object of
perception, the representation of which must be undertaken by the
imagination of the hearer. If in plastic and pictorial art we are led from
what is immediately given to something else, this must always be a
conception, because here only the abstract cannot be given directly; but a
conception must never be the source, and its communication must never be
the end of a work of art. In poetry, on the contrary, the conception is
the material, the immediately given, and therefore we may very well leave
it, in order to call up perceptions which are quite different, and in
which the end is reached. Many a conception or abstract thought may be
quite indispensable to the connection of a poem, which is yet, in itself
and directly, quite incapable of being perceived; and then it is often
made perceptible by means of some example which is subsumed under it. This
takes place in every trope, every metaphor, simile, parable, and allegory,
all of which differ only in the length and completeness of their
expression. Therefore, in the arts which employ language as their medium,
similes and allegories are of striking effect. How beautifully Cervantes
says of sleep in order to express the fact that it frees us from all
spiritual and bodily suffering, “It is a mantle that covers all mankind.”
How beautifully Kleist expresses allegorically the thought that
philosophers and men of science enlighten mankind, in the line, “Those
whose midnight lamp lights the world.” How strongly and sensuously Homer
describes the harmful Ate when he says: “She has tender feet, for she
walks not on the hard earth, but treads on the heads of men” (Il. xix.
91.) How forcibly we are struck by Menenius Agrippa’s fable of the belly
and the limbs, addressed to the people of Rome when they seceded. How
beautifully Plato’s figure of the Cave, at the beginning of the seventh
book of the “Republic” to which we have already referred, expresses a very
abstract philosophical dogma. The fable of Persephone is also to be
regarded as a deeply significant allegory of philosophical tendency, for
she became subject to the nether world by tasting a pomegranate. This
becomes peculiarly enlightening from Goethe’s treatment of the fable, as
an episode in the Triumph der Empfindsamkeit, which is beyond all
praise. Three detailed allegorical works are known to me, one, open and
avowed, is the incomparable “Criticon” of Balthasar Gracian. It consists
of a great rich web of connected and highly ingenious allegories, that
serve here as the fair clothing of moral truths, to which he thus imparts
the most perceptible form, and astonishes us by the richness of his
invention. The two others are concealed allegories, “Don Quixote” and
“Gulliver’s Travels.” The first is an allegory of the life of every man,
who will not, like others, be careful, merely for his own welfare, but
follows some objective, ideal end, which has taken possession of his
thoughts and will; and certainly, in this world, he has then a strange
appearance. In the case of Gulliver we have only to take everything
physical as spiritual or intellectual, in order to see what the “satirical
rogue,” as Hamlet would call him, meant by it. Such, then, in the poetical
allegory, the conception is always the given, which it tries to make
perceptible by means of a picture; it may sometimes be expressed or
assisted by a painted picture. Such a picture will not be regarded as a
work of art, but only as a significant symbol, and it makes no claim to
pictorial, but only to poetical worth. Such is that beautiful allegorical
vignette of Lavater’s, which must be so heartening to every defender of
truth: a hand holding a light is stung by a wasp, while gnats are burning
themselves in the flame above; underneath is the motto:


    “And although it singes the wings of the gnats,
    Destroys their heads and all their little brains,
                  Light is still light;
    And although I am stung by the angriest wasp,
                  I will not let it go.”


To this class also belongs the gravestone with the burnt-out, smoking
candle, and the inscription—


    “When it is out, it becomes clear
    Whether the candle was tallow or wax.”


Finally, of this kind is an old German genealogical tree, in which the
last representative of a very ancient family thus expresses his
determination to live his life to the end in abstinence and perfect
chastity, and therefore to let his race die out; he represents himself at
the root of the high-branching tree cutting it over himself with shears.
In general all those symbols referred to above, commonly called emblems,
which might also be defined as short painted fables with obvious morals,
belong to this class. Allegories of this kind are always to be regarded as
belonging to poetry, not to painting, and as justified thereby; moreover,
the pictorial execution is here always a matter of secondary importance,
and no more is demanded of it than that it shall represent the thing so
that we can recognise it. But in poetry, as in plastic art, the allegory
passes into the symbol if there is merely an arbitrary connection between
what it presented to perception and the abstract significance of it. For
as all symbolism rests, at bottom, on an agreement, the symbol has this
among other disadvantages, that in time its meaning is forgotten, and then
it is dumb. Who would guess why the fish is a symbol of Christianity if he
did not know? Only a Champollion; for it is entirely a phonetic
hieroglyphic. Therefore, as a poetical allegory, the Revelation of John
stands much in the same position as the reliefs with Magnus Deus sol
Mithra, which are still constantly being explained.

§ 51. If now, with the exposition which has been given of art in general,
we turn from plastic and pictorial art to poetry, we shall have no doubt
that its aim also is the revelation of the Ideas, the grades of the
objectification of will, and the communication of them to the hearer with
the distinctness and vividness with which the poetical sense comprehends
them. Ideas are essentially perceptible; if, therefore, in poetry only
abstract conceptions are directly communicated through words, it is yet
clearly the intention to make the hearer perceive the Ideas of life in the
representatives of these conceptions, and this can only take place through
the assistance of his own imagination. But in order to set the imagination
to work for the accomplishment of this end, the abstract conceptions,
which are the immediate material of poetry as of dry prose, must be so
arranged that their spheres intersect each other in such a way that none
of them can remain in its abstract universality; but, instead of it, a
perceptible representative appears to the imagination; and this is always
further modified by the words of the poet according to what his intention
may be. As the chemist obtains solid precipitates by combining perfectly
clear and transparent fluids; the poet understands how to precipitate, as
it were, the concrete, the individual, the perceptible idea, out of the
abstract and transparent universality of the concepts by the manner in
which he combines them. For the Idea can only be known by perception; and
knowledge of the Idea is the end of art. The skill of a master, in poetry
as in chemistry, enables us always to obtain the precise precipitate we
intended. This end is assisted by the numerous epithets in poetry, by
means of which the universality of every concept is narrowed more and more
till we reach the perceptible. Homer attaches to almost every substantive
an adjective, whose concept intersects and considerably diminishes the
sphere of the concept of the substantive, which is thus brought so much
the nearer to perception: for example—


    “Εν δ᾽ επεσ᾽ Ωκεανῳ λαμπρον φαος ἡελιοιο,
    Ἑλκον νυκτα μελαιναν επι ζειδωρον αρουραν.”

    (“Occidit vero in Oceanum splendidum lumen solis,
    Trahens noctem nigram super almam terram.”)


And—


    “Where gentle winds from the blue heavens sigh,
    There stand the myrtles still, the laurel high,”—


calls up before the imagination by means of a few concepts the whole
delight of a southern clime.

Rhythm and rhyme are quite peculiar aids to poetry. I can give no other
explanation of their incredibly powerful effect than that our faculties of
perception have received from time, to which they are essentially bound,
some quality on account of which we inwardly follow, and, as it were,
consent to each regularly recurring sound. In this way rhythm and rhyme
are partly a means of holding our attention, because we willingly follow
the poem read, and partly they produce in us a blind consent to what is
read prior to any judgment, and this gives the poem a certain emphatic
power of convincing independent of all reasons.

From the general nature of the material, that is, the concepts, which
poetry uses to communicate the Ideas, the extent of its province is very
great. The whole of nature, the Ideas of all grades, can be represented by
means of it, for it proceeds according to the Idea it has to impart, so
that its representations are sometimes descriptive, sometimes narrative,
and sometimes directly dramatic. If, in the representation of the lower
grades of the objectivity of will, plastic and pictorial art generally
surpass it, because lifeless nature, and even brute nature, reveals almost
its whole being in a single well-chosen moment; man, on the contrary, so
far as he does not express himself by the mere form and expression of his
person, but through a series of actions and the accompanying thoughts and
emotions, is the principal object of poetry, in which no other art can
compete with it, for here the progress or movement which cannot be
represented in plastic or pictorial art just suits its purpose.

The revelation of the Idea, which is the highest grade of the objectivity
of will, the representation of man in the connected series of his efforts
and actions, is thus the great problem of poetry. It is true that both
experience and history teach us to know man; yet oftener men than man,
i.e., they give us empirical notes of the behaviour of men to each
other, from which we may frame rules for our own conduct, oftener than
they afford us deep glimpses of the inner nature of man. The latter
function, however, is by no means entirely denied them; but as often as it
is the nature of mankind itself that discloses itself to us in history or
in our own experience, we have comprehended our experience, and the
historian has comprehended history, with artistic eyes, poetically,
i.e., according to the Idea, not the phenomenon, in its inner nature,
not in its relations. Our own experience is the indispensable condition of
understanding poetry as of understanding history; for it is, so to speak,
the dictionary of the language that both speak. But history is related to
poetry as portrait-painting is related to historical painting; the one
gives us the true in the individual, the other the true in the universal;
the one has the truth of the phenomenon, and can therefore verify it from
the phenomenal, the other has the truth of the Idea, which can be found in
no particular phenomenon, but yet speaks to us from them all. The poet
from deliberate choice represents significant characters in significant
situations; the historian takes both as they come. Indeed, he must regard
and select the circumstances and the persons, not with reference to their
inward and true significance, which expresses the Idea, but according to
the outward, apparent, and relatively important significance with regard
to the connection and the consequences. He must consider nothing in and
for itself in its essential character and expression, but must look at
everything in its relations, in its connection, in its influence upon what
follows, and especially upon its own age. Therefore he will not overlook
an action of a king, though of little significance, and in itself quite
common, because it has results and influence. And, on the other hand,
actions of the highest significance of particular and very eminent
individuals are not to be recorded by him if they have no consequences.
For his treatment follows the principle of sufficient reason, and
apprehends the phenomenon, of which this principle is the form. But the
poet comprehends the Idea, the inner nature of man apart from all
relations, outside all time, the adequate objectivity of the
thing-in-itself, at its highest grade. Even in that method of treatment
which is necessary for the historian, the inner nature and significance of
the phenomena, the kernel of all these shells, can never be entirely lost.
He who seeks for it, at any rate, may find it and recognise it. Yet that
which is significant in itself, not in its relations, the real unfolding
of the Idea, will be found far more accurately and distinctly in poetry
than in history, and, therefore, however paradoxical it may sound, far
more really genuine inner truth is to be attributed to poetry than to
history. For the historian must accurately follow the particular event
according to life, as it develops itself in time in the manifold tangled
chains of causes and effects. It is, however, impossible that he can have
all the data for this; he cannot have seen all and discovered all. He is
forsaken at every moment by the original of his picture, or a false one
substitutes itself for it, and this so constantly that I think I may
assume that in all history the false outweighs the true. The poet, on the
contrary, has comprehended the Idea of man from some definite side which
is to be represented; thus it is the nature of his own self that
objectifies itself in it for him. His knowledge, as we explained above
when speaking of sculpture, is half a priori; his ideal stands before
his mind firm, distinct, brightly illuminated, and cannot forsake him;
therefore he shows us, in the mirror of his mind, the Idea pure and
distinct, and his delineation of it down to the minutest particular is
true as life itself.(59) The great ancient historians are, therefore, in
those particulars in which their data fail them, for example, in the
speeches of their heroes—poets; indeed their whole manner of handling
their material approaches to the epic. But this gives their
representations unity, and enables them to retain inner truth, even when
outward truth was not accessible, or indeed was falsified. And as we
compared history to portrait-painting, in contradistinction to poetry,
which corresponds to historical painting, we find that Winckelmann’s
maxim, that the portrait ought to be the ideal of the individual, was
followed by the ancient historians, for they represent the individual in
such a way as to bring out that side of the Idea of man which is expressed
in it. Modern historians, on the contrary, with few exceptions, give us in
general only “a dust-bin and a lumber-room, and at the most a chronicle of
the principal political events.” Therefore, whoever desires to know man in
his inner nature, identical in all its phenomena and developments, to know
him according to the Idea, will find that the works of the great, immortal
poet present a far truer, more distinct picture, than the historians can
ever give. For even the best of the historians are, as poets, far from the
first; and moreover their hands are tied. In this aspect the relation
between the historian and the poet may be illustrated by the following
comparison. The mere, pure historian, who works only according to data, is
like a man, who without any knowledge of mathematics, has investigated the
relations of certain figures, which he has accidentally found, by
measuring them; and the problem thus empirically solved is affected of
course by all the errors of the drawn figure. The poet, on the other hand,
is like the mathematician, who constructs these relations a priori in
pure perception, and expresses them not as they actually are in the drawn
figure, but as they are in the Idea, which the drawing is intended to
render for the senses. Therefore Schiller says:—


    “What has never anywhere come to pass,
    That alone never grows old.”


Indeed I must attribute greater value to biographies, and especially to
autobiographies, in relation to the knowledge of the nature of man, than
to history proper, at least as it is commonly handled. Partly because in
the former the data can be collected more accurately and completely than
in the latter; partly, because in history proper, it is not so much men as
nations and heroes that act, and the individuals who do appear, seem so
far off, surrounded with such pomp and circumstance, clothed in the stiff
robes of state, or heavy, inflexible armour, that it is really hard
through all this to recognise the human movements. On the other hand, the
life of the individual when described with truth, in a narrow sphere,
shows the conduct of men in all its forms and subtilties, the excellence,
the virtue, and even holiness of a few, the perversity, meanness, and
knavery of most, the dissolute profligacy of some. Besides, in the only
aspect we are considering here, that of the inner significance of the
phenomenal, it is quite the same whether the objects with which the action
is concerned, are, relatively considered, trifling or important,
farm-houses or kingdoms: for all these things in themselves are without
significance, and obtain it only in so far as the will is moved by them.
The motive has significance only through its relation to the will, while
the relation which it has as a thing to other things like itself, does not
concern us here. As a circle of one inch in diameter, and a circle of
forty million miles in diameter, have precisely the same geometrical
properties, so are the events and the history of a village and a kingdom
essentially the same; and we may study and learn to know mankind as well
in the one as in the other. It is also a mistake to suppose that
autobiographies are full of deceit and dissimulation. On the contrary,
lying (though always possible) is perhaps more difficult there than
elsewhere. Dissimulation is easiest in mere conversation; indeed, though
it may sound paradoxical, it is really more difficult even in a letter.
For in the case of a letter the writer is alone, and looks into himself,
and not out on the world, so that what is strange and distant does not
easily approach him; and he has not the test of the impression made upon
another before his eyes. But the receiver of the letter peruses it quietly
in a mood unknown to the writer, reads it repeatedly and at different
times, and thus easily finds out the concealed intention. We also get to
know an author as a man most easily from his books, because all these
circumstances act here still more strongly and permanently. And in an
autobiography it is so difficult to dissimulate, that perhaps there does
not exist a single one that is not, as a whole, more true, than any
history that ever was written. The man who writes his own life surveys it
as a whole, the particular becomes small, the near becomes distant, the
distant becomes near again, the motives that influenced him shrink; he
seats himself at the confessional, and has done so of his own free will;
the spirit of lying does not so easily take hold of him here, for there is
also in every man an inclination to truth which has first to be overcome
whenever he lies, and which here has taken up a specially strong position.
The relation between biography and the history of nations may be made
clear for perception by means of the following comparison: History shows
us mankind as a view from a high mountain shows us nature; we see much at
a time, wide stretches, great masses, but nothing is distinct nor
recognisable in all the details of its own peculiar nature. On the other
hand, the representation of the life of the individual shows us the man,
as we see nature if we go about among her trees, plants, rocks, and
waters. But in landscape-painting, in which the artist lets us look at
nature with his eyes, the knowledge of the Ideas, and the condition of
pure will-less knowing, which is demanded by these, is made much easier
for us; and, in the same way, poetry is far superior both to history and
biography, in the representation of the Ideas which may be looked for in
all three. For here also genius holds up to us the magic glass, in which
all that is essential and significant appears before us collected and
placed in the clearest light, and what is accidental and foreign is left
out.(60)

The representation of the Idea of man, which is the work of the poet, may
be performed, so that what is represented is also the representer. This is
the case in lyrical poetry, in songs, properly so called, in which the
poet only perceives vividly his own state and describes it. Thus a certain
subjectivity is essential to this kind of poetry from the nature of its
object. Again, what is to be represented may be entirely different from
him who represents it, as is the case in all other kinds of poetry, in
which the poet more or less conceals himself behind his representation,
and at last disappears altogether. In the ballad the poet still expresses
to some extent his own state through the tone and proportion of the whole;
therefore, though much more objective than the lyric, it has yet something
subjective. This becomes less in the idyll, still less in the romantic
poem, almost entirely disappears in the true epic, and even to the last
vestige in the drama, which is the most objective and, in more than one
respect, the completest and most difficult form of poetry. The lyrical
form of poetry is consequently the easiest, and although art, as a whole,
belongs only to the true man of genius, who so rarely appears, even a man
who is not in general very remarkable may produce a beautiful song if, by
actual strong excitement from without, some inspiration raises his mental
powers; for all that is required for this is a lively perception of his
own state at a moment of emotional excitement. This is proved by the
existence of many single songs by individuals who have otherwise remained
unknown; especially the German national songs, of which we have an
exquisite collection in the “Wunderhorn;” and also by innumerable
love-songs and other songs of the people in all languages;—for to seize
the mood of a moment and embody it in a song is the whole achievement of
this kind of poetry. Yet in the lyrics of true poets the inner nature of
all mankind is reflected, and all that millions of past, present, and
future men have found, or will find, in the same situations, which are
constantly recurring, finds its exact expression in them. And because
these situations, by constant recurrence, are permanent as man himself and
always call up the same sensations, the lyrical productions of genuine
poets remain through thousands of years true, powerful, and fresh. But if
the poet is always the universal man, then all that has ever moved a human
heart, all that human nature in any situation has ever produced from
itself, all that dwells and broods in any human breast—is his theme and
his material, and also all the rest of nature. Therefore the poet may just
as well sing of voluptuousness as of mysticism, be Anacreon or Angelus
Silesius, write tragedies or comedies, represent the sublime or the common
mind—according to humour or vocation. And no one has the right to
prescribe to the poet what he ought to be—noble and sublime, moral, pious,
Christian, one thing or another, still less to reproach him because he is
one thing and not another. He is the mirror of mankind, and brings to its
consciousness what it feels and does.

If we now consider more closely the nature of the lyric proper, and select
as examples exquisite and pure models, not those that approach in any way
to some other form of poetry, such as the ballad, the elegy, the hymn, the
epigram, &c., we shall find that the peculiar nature of the lyric, in the
narrowest sense, is this: It is the subject of will, i.e., his own
volition, which the consciousness of the singer feels; often as a released
and satisfied desire (joy), but still oftener as a restricted desire
(grief), always as an emotion, a passion, a moved frame of mind. Besides
this, however, and along with it, by the sight of surrounding nature, the
singer becomes conscious of himself as the subject of pure, will-less
knowing, whose unbroken blissful peace now appears, in contrast to the
stress of desire which is always restricted and always needy. The feeling
of this contrast, this alternation, is really what the lyric as a whole
expresses, and what principally constitutes the lyrical state of mind. In
it pure knowing comes to us, as it were, to deliver us from desire and its
stain; we follow, but only for an instant; desire, the remembrance of our
own personal ends, tears us anew from peaceful contemplation; yet ever
again the next beautiful surrounding in which the pure will-less knowledge
presents itself to us, allures us away from desire. Therefore, in the
lyric and the lyrical mood, desire (the personal interest of the ends),
and pure perception of the surrounding presented, are wonderfully mingled
with each other; connections between them are sought for and imagined; the
subjective disposition, the affection of the will, imparts its own hue to
the perceived surrounding, and conversely, the surroundings communicate
the reflex of their colour to the will. The true lyric is the expression
of the whole of this mingled and divided state of mind. In order to make
clear by examples this abstract analysis of a frame of mind that is very
far from all abstraction, any of the immortal songs of Goethe may be
taken. As specially adapted for this end I shall recommend only a few:
“The Shepherd’s Lament,” “Welcome and Farewell,” “To the Moon,” “On the
Lake,” “Autumn;” also the songs in the “Wunderhorn” are excellent
examples; particularly the one which begins, “O Bremen, I must now leave
thee.” As a comical and happy parody of the lyrical character a song of
Voss strikes me as remarkable. It describes the feeling of a drunk plumber
falling from a tower, who observes in passing that the clock on the tower
is at half-past eleven, a remark which is quite foreign to his condition,
and thus belongs to knowledge free from will. Whoever accepts the view
that has been expressed of the lyrical frame of mind, will also allow,
that it is the sensuous and poetical knowledge of the principle which I
established in my essay on the Principle of Sufficient Reason, and have
also referred to in this work, that the identity of the subject of knowing
with that of willing may be called the miracle κατ᾽ εξοχην; so that the
poetical effect of the lyric rests finally on the truth of that principle.
In the course of life these two subjects, or, in popular language, head
and heart, are ever becoming further apart; men are always separating more
between their subjective feeling and their objective knowledge. In the
child the two are still entirely blended together; it scarcely knows how
to distinguish itself from its surroundings, it is at one with them. In
the young man all perception chiefly affects feeling and mood, and even
mingles with it, as Byron very beautifully expresses—


    “I live not in myself, but I become
    Portion of that around me; and to me
    High mountains are a feeling.”


This is why the youth clings so closely to the perceptible and outward
side of things; this is why he is only fit for lyrical poetry, and only
the full-grown man is capable of the drama. The old man we can think of as
at the most an epic poet, like Ossian, and Homer, for narration is
characteristic of old age.

In the more objective kinds of poetry, especially in the romance, the
epic, and the drama, the end, the revelation of the Idea of man, is
principally attained by two means, by true and profound representation of
significant characters, and by the invention of pregnant situations in
which they disclose themselves. For as it is incumbent upon the chemist
not only to exhibit the simple elements, pure and genuine, and their
principal compounds, but also to expose them to the influence of such
reagents as will clearly and strikingly bring out their peculiar
qualities, so is it incumbent on the poet not only to present to us
significant characters truly and faithfully as nature itself; but, in
order that we may get to know them, he must place them in those situations
in which their peculiar qualities will fully unfold themselves, and appear
distinctly in sharp outline; situations which are therefore called
significant. In real life, and in history, situations of this kind are
rarely brought about by chance, and they stand alone, lost and concealed
in the multitude of those which are insignificant. The complete
significance of the situations ought to distinguish the romance, the epic,
and the drama from real life as completely as the arrangement and
selection of significant characters. In both, however, absolute truth is a
necessary condition of their effect, and want of unity in the characters,
contradiction either of themselves or of the nature of humanity in
general, as well as impossibility, or very great improbability in the
events, even in mere accessories, offend just as much in poetry as badly
drawn figures, false perspective, or wrong lighting in painting. For both
in poetry and painting we demand the faithful mirror of life, of man, of
the world, only made more clear by the representation, and more
significant by the arrangement. For there is only one end of all the arts,
the representation of the Ideas; and their essential difference lies
simply in the different grades of the objectification of will to which the
Ideas that are to be represented belong. This also determines the material
of the representation. Thus the arts which are most widely separated may
yet throw light on each other. For example, in order to comprehend fully
the Ideas of water it is not sufficient to see it in the quiet pond or in
the evenly-flowing stream; but these Ideas disclose themselves fully only
when the water appears under all circumstances and exposed to all kinds of
obstacles. The effects of the varied circumstances and obstacles give it
the opportunity of fully exhibiting all its qualities. This is why we find
it beautiful when it tumbles, rushes, and foams, or leaps into the air, or
falls in a cataract of spray; or, lastly, if artificially confined it
springs up in a fountain. Thus showing itself different under different
circumstances, it yet always faithfully asserts its character; it is just
as natural to it to spout up as to lie in glassy stillness; it is as ready
for the one as for the other as soon as the circumstances appear. Now,
what the engineer achieves with the fluid matter of water, the architect
achieves with the rigid matter of stone, and just this the epic or
dramatic poet achieves with the Idea of man. Unfolding and rendering
distinct the Idea expressing itself in the object of every art, the Idea
of the will which objectifies itself at each grade, is the common end of
all the arts. The life of man, as it shows itself for the most part in the
real world, is like the water, as it is generally seen in the pond and the
river; but in the epic, the romance, the tragedy, selected characters are
placed in those circumstances in which all their special qualities unfold
themselves, the depths of the human heart are revealed, and become visible
in extraordinary and very significant actions. Thus poetry objectifies the
Idea of man, an Idea which has the peculiarity of expressing itself in
highly individual characters.

Tragedy is to be regarded, and is recognised as the summit of poetical
art, both on account of the greatness of its effect and the difficulty of
its achievement. It is very significant for our whole system, and well
worthy of observation, that the end of this highest poetical achievement
is the representation of the terrible side of life. The unspeakable pain,
the wail of humanity, the triumph of evil, the scornful mastery of chance,
and the irretrievable fall of the just and innocent, is here presented to
us; and in this lies a significant hint of the nature of the world and of
existence. It is the strife of will with itself, which here, completely
unfolded at the highest grade of its objectivity, comes into fearful
prominence. It becomes visible in the suffering of men, which is now
introduced, partly through chance and error, which appear as the rulers of
the world, personified as fate, on account of their insidiousness, which
even reaches the appearance of design; partly it proceeds from man
himself, through the self-mortifying efforts of a few, through the
wickedness and perversity of most. It is one and the same will that lives
and appears in them all, but whose phenomena fight against each other and
destroy each other. In one individual it appears powerfully, in another
more weakly; in one more subject to reason, and softened by the light of
knowledge, in another less so, till at last, in some single case, this
knowledge, purified and heightened by suffering itself, reaches the point
at which the phenomenon, the veil of Mâya, no longer deceives it. It sees
through the form of the phenomenon, the principium individuationis. The
egoism which rests on this perishes with it, so that now the motives
that were so powerful before have lost their might, and instead of them
the complete knowledge of the nature of the world, which has a quieting
effect on the will, produces resignation, the surrender not merely of
life, but of the very will to live. Thus we see in tragedies the noblest
men, after long conflict and suffering, at last renounce the ends they
have so keenly followed, and all the pleasures of life for ever, or else
freely and joyfully surrender life itself. So is it with the steadfast
prince of Calderon; with Gretchen in “Faust;” with Hamlet, whom his friend
Horatio would willingly follow, but is bade remain a while, and in this
harsh world draw his breath in pain, to tell the story of Hamlet, and
clear his memory; so also is it with the Maid of Orleans, the Bride of
Messina; they all die purified by suffering, i.e., after the will to
live which was formerly in them is dead. In the “Mohammed” of Voltaire
this is actually expressed in the concluding words which the dying Palmira
addresses to Mohammad: “The world is for tyrants: live!” On the other
hand, the demand for so-called poetical justice rests on entire
misconception of the nature of tragedy, and, indeed, of the nature of the
world itself. It boldly appears in all its dulness in the criticisms which
Dr. Samuel Johnson made on particular plays of Shakespeare, for he very
naïvely laments its entire absence. And its absence is certainly obvious,
for in what has Ophelia, Desdemona, or Cordelia offended? But only the
dull, optimistic, Protestant-rationalistic, or peculiarly Jewish view of
life will make the demand for poetical justice, and find satisfaction in
it. The true sense of tragedy is the deeper insight, that it is not his
own individual sins that the hero atones for, but original sin, i.e.,
the crime of existence itself:


    “Pues el delito mayor
    Del hombre es haber nacido;”

    (“For the greatest crime of man
    Is that he was born;”)


as Calderon exactly expresses it.

I shall allow myself only one remark, more closely concerning the
treatment of tragedy. The representation of a great misfortune is alone
essential to tragedy. But the many different ways in which this is
introduced by the poet may be brought under three specific conceptions. It
may happen by means of a character of extraordinary wickedness, touching
the utmost limits of possibility, who becomes the author of the
misfortune; examples of this kind are Richard III., Iago in “Othello,”
Shylock in “The Merchant of Venice,” Franz Moor, Phædra of Euripides,
Creon in the “Antigone,” &c., &c. Secondly, it may happen through blind
fate, i.e., chance and error; a true pattern of this kind is the Œdipus
Rex of Sophocles, the “Trachiniæ” also; and in general most of the
tragedies of the ancients belong to this class. Among modern tragedies,
“Romeo and Juliet,” “Tancred” by Voltaire, and “The Bride of Messina,” are
examples. Lastly, the misfortune may be brought about by the mere position
of the dramatis personæ with regard to each other, through their
relations; so that there is no need either for a tremendous error or an
unheard-of accident, nor yet for a character whose wickedness reaches the
limits of human possibility; but characters of ordinary morality, under
circumstances such as often occur, are so situated with regard to each
other that their position compels them, knowingly and with their eyes
open, to do each other the greatest injury, without any one of them being
entirely in the wrong. This last kind of tragedy seems to me far to
surpass the other two, for it shows us the greatest misfortune, not as an
exception, not as something occasioned by rare circumstances or monstrous
characters, but as arising easily and of itself out of the actions and
characters of men, indeed almost as essential to them, and thus brings it
terribly near to us. In the other two kinds we may look on the prodigious
fate and the horrible wickedness as terrible powers which certainly
threaten us, but only from afar, which we may very well escape without
taking refuge in renunciation. But in the last kind of tragedy we see that
those powers which destroy happiness and life are such that their path to
us also is open at every moment; we see the greatest sufferings brought
about by entanglements that our fate might also partake of, and through
actions that perhaps we also are capable of performing, and so could not
complain of injustice; then shuddering we feel ourselves already in the
midst of hell. This last kind of tragedy is also the most difficult of
achievement; for the greatest effect has to be produced in it with the
least use of means and causes of movement, merely through the position and
distribution of the characters; therefore even in many of the best
tragedies this difficulty is evaded. Yet one tragedy may be referred to as
a perfect model of this kind, a tragedy which in other respects is far
surpassed by more than one work of the same great master; it is “Clavigo.”
“Hamlet” belongs to a certain extent to this class, as far as the relation
of Hamlet to Laertes and Ophelia is concerned. “Wallenstein” has also this
excellence. “Faust” belongs entirely to this class, if we regard the
events connected with Gretchen and her brother as the principal action;
also the “Cid” of Corneille, only that it lacks the tragic conclusion,
while on the contrary the analogous relation of Max to Thecla has it.(61)

§ 52. Now that we have considered all the fine arts in the general way
that is suitable to our point of view, beginning with architecture, the
peculiar end of which is to elucidate the objectification of will at the
lowest grades of its visibility, in which it shows itself as the dumb
unconscious tendency of the mass in accordance with laws, and yet already
reveals a breach of the unity of will with itself in a conflict between
gravity and rigidity—and ending with the consideration of tragedy, which
presents to us at the highest grades of the objectification of will this
very conflict with itself in terrible magnitude and distinctness; we find
that there is still another fine art which has been excluded from our
consideration, and had to be excluded, for in the systematic connection of
our exposition there was no fitting place for it—I mean music. It stands
alone, quite cut off from all the other arts. In it we do not recognise
the copy or repetition of any Idea of existence in the world. Yet it is
such a great and exceedingly noble art, its effect on the inmost nature of
man is so powerful, and it is so entirely and deeply understood by him in
his inmost consciousness as a perfectly universal language, the
distinctness of which surpasses even that of the perceptible world itself,
that we certainly have more to look for in it than an exercitum
arithmeticæ occultum nescientis se numerare animi,(62) which Leibnitz
called it. Yet he was perfectly right, as he considered only its immediate
external significance, its form. But if it were nothing more, the
satisfaction which it affords would be like that which we feel when a sum
in arithmetic comes out right, and could not be that intense pleasure with
which we see the deepest recesses of our nature find utterance. From our
standpoint, therefore, at which the æsthetic effect is the criterion, we
must attribute to music a far more serious and deep significance,
connected with the inmost nature of the world and our own self, and in
reference to which the arithmetical proportions, to which it may be
reduced, are related, not as the thing signified, but merely as the sign.
That in some sense music must be related to the world as the
representation to the thing represented, as the copy to the original, we
may conclude from the analogy of the other arts, all of which possess this
character, and affect us on the whole in the same way as it does, only
that the effect of music is stronger, quicker, more necessary and
infallible. Further, its representative relation to the world must be very
deep, absolutely true, and strikingly accurate, because it is instantly
understood by every one, and has the appearance of a certain
infallibility, because its form may be reduced to perfectly definite rules
expressed in numbers, from which it cannot free itself without entirely
ceasing to be music. Yet the point of comparison between music and the
world, the respect in which it stands to the world in the relation of a
copy or repetition, is very obscure. Men have practised music in all ages
without being able to account for this; content to understand it directly,
they renounce all claim to an abstract conception of this direct
understanding itself.

I gave my mind entirely up to the impression of music in all its forms,
and then returned to reflection and the system of thought expressed in the
present work, and thus I arrived at an explanation of the inner nature of
music and of the nature of its imitative relation to the world—which from
analogy had necessarily to be presupposed—an explanation which is quite
sufficient for myself, and satisfactory to my investigation, and which
will doubtless be equally evident to any one who has followed me thus far
and has agreed with my view of the world. Yet I recognise the fact that it
is essentially impossible to prove this explanation, for it assumes and
establishes a relation of music, as idea, to that which from its nature
can never be idea, and music will have to be regarded as the copy of an
original which can never itself be directly presented as idea. I can
therefore do no more than state here, at the conclusion of this third
book, which has been principally devoted to the consideration of the arts,
the explanation of the marvellous art of music which satisfies myself, and
I must leave the acceptance or denial of my view to the effect produced
upon each of my readers both by music itself and by the whole system of
thought communicated in this work. Moreover, I regard it as necessary, in
order to be able to assent with full conviction to the exposition of the
significance of music I am about to give, that one should often listen to
music with constant reflection upon my theory concerning it, and for this
again it is necessary to be very familiar with the whole of my system of
thought.

The (Platonic) Ideas are the adequate objectification of will. To excite
or suggest the knowledge of these by means of the representation of
particular things (for works of art themselves are always representations
of particular things) is the end of all the other arts, which can only be
attained by a corresponding change in the knowing subject. Thus all these
arts objectify the will indirectly only by means of the Ideas; and since
our world is nothing but the manifestation of the Ideas in multiplicity,
though their entrance into the principium individuationis (the form of
the knowledge possible for the individual as such), music also, since it
passes over the Ideas, is entirely independent of the phenomenal world,
ignores it altogether, could to a certain extent exist if there was no
world at all, which cannot be said of the other arts. Music is as direct
an objectification and copy of the whole will as the world itself, nay,
even as the Ideas, whose multiplied manifestation constitutes the world of
individual things. Music is thus by no means like the other arts, the copy
of the Ideas, but the copy of the will itself, whose objectivity the
Ideas are. This is why the effect of music is so much more powerful and
penetrating than that of the other arts, for they speak only of shadows,
but it speaks of the thing itself. Since, however, it is the same will
which objectifies itself both in the Ideas and in music, though in quite
different ways, there must be, not indeed a direct likeness, but yet a
parallel, an analogy, between music and the Ideas whose manifestation in
multiplicity and incompleteness is the visible world. The establishing of
this analogy will facilitate, as an illustration, the understanding of
this exposition, which is so difficult on account of the obscurity of the
subject.

I recognise in the deepest tones of harmony, in the bass, the lowest
grades of the objectification of will, unorganised nature, the mass of the
planet. It is well known that all the high notes which are easily sounded,
and die away more quickly, are produced by the vibration in their vicinity
of the deep bass-notes. When, also, the low notes sound, the high notes
always sound faintly, and it is a law of harmony that only those high
notes may accompany a bass-note which actually already sound along with it
of themselves (its sons harmoniques) on account of its vibration. This
is analogous to the fact that the whole of the bodies and organisations of
nature must be regarded as having come into existence through gradual
development out of the mass of the planet; this is both their supporter
and their source, and the same relation subsists between the high notes
and the bass. There is a limit of depth, below which no sound is audible.
This corresponds to the fact that no matter can be perceived without form
and quality, i.e., without the manifestation of a force which cannot be
further explained, in which an Idea expresses itself, and, more generally,
that no matter can be entirely without will. Thus, as a certain pitch is
inseparable from the note as such, so a certain grade of the manifestation
of will is inseparable from matter. Bass is thus, for us, in harmony what
unorganised nature, the crudest mass, upon which all rests, and from which
everything originates and develops, is in the world. Now, further, in the
whole of the complemental parts which make up the harmony between the bass
and the leading voice singing the melody, I recognise the whole gradation
of the Ideas in which the will objectifies itself. Those nearer to the
bass are the lower of these grades, the still unorganised, but yet
manifold phenomenal things; the higher represent to me the world of plants
and beasts. The definite intervals of the scale are parallel to the
definite grades of the objectification of will, the definite species in
nature. The departure from the arithmetical correctness of the intervals,
through some temperament, or produced by the key selected, is analogous to
the departure of the individual from the type of the species. Indeed, even
the impure discords, which give no definite interval, may be compared to
the monstrous abortions produced by beasts of two species, or by man and
beast. But to all these bass and complemental parts which make up the
harmony there is wanting that connected progress which belongs only to
the high voice singing the melody, and it alone moves quickly and lightly
in modulations and runs, while all these others have only a slower
movement without a connection in each part for itself. The deep bass moves
most slowly, the representative of the crudest mass. Its rising and
falling occurs only by large intervals, in thirds, fourths, fifths, never
by one tone, unless it is a base inverted by double counterpoint. This
slow movement is also physically essential to it; a quick run or shake in
the low notes cannot even be imagined. The higher complemental parts,
which are parallel to animal life, move more quickly, but yet without
melodious connection and significant progress. The disconnected course of
all the complemental parts, and their regulation by definite laws, is
analogous to the fact that in the whole irrational world, from the crystal
to the most perfect animal, no being has a connected consciousness of its
own which would make its life into a significant whole, and none
experiences a succession of mental developments, none perfects itself by
culture, but everything exists always in the same way according to its
kind, determined by fixed law. Lastly, in the melody, in the high,
singing, principal voice leading the whole and progressing with
unrestrained freedom, in the unbroken significant connection of one
thought from beginning to end representing a whole, I recognise the
highest grade of the objectification of will, the intellectual life and
effort of man. As he alone, because endowed with reason, constantly looks
before and after on the path of his actual life and its innumerable
possibilities, and so achieves a course of life which is intellectual, and
therefore connected as a whole; corresponding to this, I say, the melody
has significant intentional connection from beginning to end. It records,
therefore, the history of the intellectually enlightened will. This will
expresses itself in the actual world as the series of its deeds; but
melody says more, it records the most secret history of this
intellectually-enlightened will, pictures every excitement, every effort,
every movement of it, all that which the reason collects under the wide
and negative concept of feeling, and which it cannot apprehend further
through its abstract concepts. Therefore it has always been said that
music is the language of feeling and of passion, as words are the language
of reason. Plato explains it as ἡ των μελων κινησις μεμιμημενη, εν τοις
παθημασιν ὁταν ψυχη γινηται (melodiarum motus, animi affectus imitans),
De Leg. vii.; and also Aristotle says: δια τι οἱ ρυθμοι και τα μελη, φωνη
ουσα, ηθεσιν εοικε (cur numeri musici et modi, qui voces sunt, moribus
similes sese exhibent?): Probl. c. 19.

Now the nature of man consists in this, that his will strives, is
satisfied and strives anew, and so on for ever. Indeed, his happiness and
well-being consist simply in the quick transition from wish to
satisfaction, and from satisfaction to a new wish. For the absence of
satisfaction is suffering, the empty longing for a new wish, languor,
ennui. And corresponding to this the nature of melody is a constant
digression and deviation from the key-note in a thousand ways, not only to
the harmonious intervals to the third and dominant, but to every tone, to
the dissonant sevenths and to the superfluous degrees; yet there always
follows a constant return to the key-note. In all these deviations melody
expresses the multifarious efforts of will, but always its satisfaction
also by the final return to an harmonious interval, and still more, to the
key-note. The composition of melody, the disclosure in it of all the
deepest secrets of human willing and feeling, is the work of genius, whose
action, which is more apparent here than anywhere else, lies far from all
reflection and conscious intention, and may be called an inspiration. The
conception is here, as everywhere in art, unfruitful. The composer reveals
the inner nature of the world, and expresses the deepest wisdom in a
language which his reason does not understand; as a person under the
influence of mesmerism tells things of which he has no conception when he
awakes. Therefore in the composer, more than in any other artist, the man
is entirely separated and distinct from the artist. Even in the
explanation of this wonderful art, the concept shows its poverty and
limitation. I shall try, however, to complete our analogy. As quick
transition from wish to satisfaction, and from satisfaction to a new wish,
is happiness and well-being, so quick melodies without great deviations
are cheerful; slow melodies, striking painful discords, and only winding
back through many bars to the keynote are, as analogous to the delayed and
hardly won satisfaction, sad. The delay of the new excitement of will,
languor, could have no other expression than the sustained keynote, the
effect of which would soon be unbearable; very monotonous and unmeaning
melodies approach this effect. The short intelligible subjects of quick
dance-music seem to speak only of easily attained common pleasure. On the
other hand, the Allegro maestoso, in elaborate movements, long passages,
and wide deviations, signifies a greater, nobler effort towards a more
distant end, and its final attainment. The Adagio speaks of the pain of
a great and noble effort which despises all trifling happiness. But how
wonderful is the effect of the minor and major! How astounding that
the change of half a tone, the entrance of a minor third instead of a
major, at once and inevitably forces upon us an anxious painful feeling,
from which again we are just as instantaneously delivered by the major.
The Adagio lengthens in the minor the expression of the keenest pain,
and becomes even a convulsive wail. Dance-music in the minor seems to
indicate the failure of that trifling happiness which we ought rather to
despise, seems to speak of the attainment of a lower end with toil and
trouble. The inexhaustibleness of possible melodies corresponds to the
inexhaustibleness of Nature in difference of individuals, physiognomies,
and courses of life. The transition from one key to an entirely different
one, since it altogether breaks the connection with what went before, is
like death, for the individual ends in it; but the will which appeared in
this individual lives after him as before him, appearing in other
individuals, whose consciousness, however, has no connection with his.

But it must never be forgotten, in the investigation of all these
analogies I have pointed out, that music has no direct, but merely an
indirect relation to them, for it never expresses the phenomenon, but only
the inner nature, the in-itself of all phenomena, the will itself. It does
not therefore express this or that particular and definite joy, this or
that sorrow, or pain, or horror, or delight, or merriment, or peace of
mind; but joy, sorrow, pain, horror, delight, merriment, peace of mind
themselves, to a certain extent in the abstract, their essential nature,
without accessories, and therefore without their motives. Yet we
completely understand them in this extracted quintessence. Hence it arises
that our imagination is so easily excited by music, and now seeks to give
form to that invisible yet actively moved spirit-world which speaks to us
directly, and clothe it with flesh and blood, i.e., to embody it in an
analogous example. This is the origin of the song with words, and finally
of the opera, the text of which should therefore never forsake that
subordinate position in order to make itself the chief thing and the music
a mere means of expressing it, which is a great misconception and a piece
of utter perversity; for music always expresses only the quintessence of
life and its events, never these themselves, and therefore their
differences do not always affect it. It is precisely this universality,
which belongs exclusively to it, together with the greatest
determinateness, that gives music the high worth which it has as the
panacea for all our woes. Thus, if music is too closely united to the
words, and tries to form itself according to the events, it is striving to
speak a language which is not its own. No one has kept so free from this
mistake as Rossini; therefore his music speaks its own language so
distinctly and purely that it requires no words, and produces its full
effect when rendered by instruments alone.

According to all this, we may regard the phenomenal world, or nature, and
music as two different expressions of the same thing, which is therefore
itself the only medium of their analogy, so that a knowledge of it is
demanded in order to understand that analogy. Music, therefore, if
regarded as an expression of the world, is in the highest degree a
universal language, which is related indeed to the universality of
concepts, much as they are related to the particular things. Its
universality, however, is by no means that empty universality of
abstraction, but quite of a different kind, and is united with thorough
and distinct definiteness. In this respect it resembles geometrical
figures and numbers, which are the universal forms of all possible objects
of experience and applicable to them all a priori, and yet are not
abstract but perceptible and thoroughly determined. All possible efforts,
excitements, and manifestations of will, all that goes on in the heart of
man and that reason includes in the wide, negative concept of feeling, may
be expressed by the infinite number of possible melodies, but always in
the universal, in the mere form, without the material, always according to
the thing-in-itself, not the phenomenon, the inmost soul, as it were, of
the phenomenon, without the body. This deep relation which music has to
the true nature of all things also explains the fact that suitable music
played to any scene, action, event, or surrounding seems to disclose to us
its most secret meaning, and appears as the most accurate and distinct
commentary upon it. This is so truly the case, that whoever gives himself
up entirely to the impression of a symphony, seems to see all the possible
events of life and the world take place in himself, yet if he reflects, he
can find no likeness between the music and the things that passed before
his mind. For, as we have said, music is distinguished from all the other
arts by the fact that it is not a copy of the phenomenon, or, more
accurately, the adequate objectivity of will, but is the direct copy of
the will itself, and therefore exhibits itself as the metaphysical to
everything physical in the world, and as the thing-in-itself to every
phenomenon. We might, therefore, just as well call the world embodied
music as embodied will; and this is the reason why music makes every
picture, and indeed every scene of real life and of the world, at once
appear with higher significance, certainly all the more in proportion as
its melody is analogous to the inner spirit of the given phenomenon. It
rests upon this that we are able to set a poem to music as a song, or a
perceptible representation as a pantomime, or both as an opera. Such
particular pictures of human life, set to the universal language of music,
are never bound to it or correspond to it with stringent necessity; but
they stand to it only in the relation of an example chosen at will to a
general concept. In the determinateness of the real, they represent that
which music expresses in the universality of mere form. For melodies are
to a certain extent, like general concepts, an abstraction from the
actual. This actual world, then, the world of particular things, affords
the object of perception, the special and individual, the particular case,
both to the universality of the concepts and to the universality of the
melodies. But these two universalities are in a certain respect opposed to
each other; for the concepts contain particulars only as the first forms
abstracted from perception, as it were, the separated shell of things;
thus they are, strictly speaking, abstracta; music, on the other hand,
gives the inmost kernel which precedes all forms, or the heart of things.
This relation may be very well expressed in the language of the schoolmen
by saying the concepts are the universalia post rem, but music gives the
universalia ante rem, and the real world the universalia in re. To the
universal significance of a melody to which a poem has been set, it is
quite possible to set other equally arbitrarily selected examples of the
universal expressed in this poem corresponding to the significance of the
melody in the same degree. This is why the same composition is suitable to
many verses; and this is also what makes the vaudeville possible. But
that in general a relation is possible between a composition and a
perceptible representation rests, as we have said, upon the fact that both
are simply different expressions of the same inner being of the world.
When now, in the particular case, such a relation is actually given, that
is to say, when the composer has been able to express in the universal
language of music the emotions of will which constitute the heart of an
event, then the melody of the song, the music of the opera, is expressive.
But the analogy discovered by the composer between the two must have
proceeded from the direct knowledge of the nature of the world unknown to
his reason, and must not be an imitation produced with conscious intention
by means of conceptions, otherwise the music does not express the inner
nature of the will itself, but merely gives an inadequate imitation of its
phenomenon. All specially imitative music does this; for example, “The
Seasons,” by Haydn; also many passages of his “Creation,” in which
phenomena of the external world are directly imitated; also all
battle-pieces. Such music is entirely to be rejected.

The unutterable depth of all music by virtue of which it floats through
our consciousness as the vision of a paradise firmly believed in yet ever
distant from us, and by which also it is so fully understood and yet so
inexplicable, rests on the fact that it restores to us all the emotions of
our inmost nature, but entirely without reality and far removed from their
pain. So also the seriousness which is essential to it, which excludes the
absurd from its direct and peculiar province, is to be explained by the
fact that its object is not the idea, with reference to which alone
deception and absurdity are possible; but its object is directly the will,
and this is essentially the most serious of all things, for it is that on
which all depends. How rich in content and full of significance the
language of music is, we see from the repetitions, as well as the Da
capo, the like of which would be unbearable in works composed in a
language of words, but in music are very appropriate and beneficial, for,
in order to comprehend it fully, we must hear it twice.

In the whole of this exposition of music I have been trying to bring out
clearly that it expresses in a perfectly universal language, in a
homogeneous material, mere tones, and with the greatest determinateness
and truth, the inner nature, the in-itself of the world, which we think
under the concept of will, because will is its most distinct
manifestation. Further, according to my view and contention, philosophy is
nothing but a complete and accurate repetition or expression of the nature
of the world in very general concepts, for only in such is it possible to
get a view of that whole nature which will everywhere be adequate and
applicable. Thus, whoever has followed me and entered into my mode of
thought, will not think it so very paradoxical if I say, that supposing it
were possible to give a perfectly accurate, complete explanation of music,
extending even to particulars, that is to say, a detailed repetition in
concepts of what it expresses, this would also be a sufficient repetition
and explanation of the world in concepts, or at least entirely parallel to
such an explanation, and thus it would be the true philosophy.
Consequently the saying of Leibnitz quoted above, which is quite accurate
from a lower standpoint, may be parodied in the following way to suit our
higher view of music: Musica est exercitium metaphysices occultum
nescientis se philosophari animi; for scire, to know, always means to
have fixed in abstract concepts. But further, on account of the truth of
the saying of Leibnitz, which is confirmed in various ways, music,
regarded apart from its æsthetic or inner significance, and looked at
merely externally and purely empirically, is simply the means of
comprehending directly and in the concrete large numbers and complex
relations of numbers, which otherwise we could only know indirectly by
fixing them in concepts. Therefore by the union of these two very
different but correct views of music we may arrive at a conception of the
possibility of a philosophy of number, such as that of Pythagoras and of
the Chinese in Y-King, and then interpret in this sense the saying of the
Pythagoreans which Sextus Empiricus quotes (adv. Math., L. vii.): τῳ
αριθμῳ δε τα παντ᾽ επεοικεν (numero cuncta assimilantur). And if,
finally, we apply this view to the interpretation of harmony and melody
given above, we shall find that a mere moral philosophy without an
explanation of Nature, such as Socrates wanted to introduce, is precisely
analogous to a mere melody without harmony, which Rousseau exclusively
desired; and, in opposition to this mere physics and metaphysics without
ethics, will correspond to mere harmony without melody. Allow me to add to
these cursory observations a few more remarks concerning the analogy of
music with the phenomenal world. We found in the second book that the
highest grade of the objectification of will, man, could not appear alone
and isolated, but presupposed the grades below him, as these again
presupposed the grades lower still. In the same way music, which directly
objectifies the will, just as the world does, is complete only in full
harmony. In order to achieve its full effect, the high leading voice of
the melody requires the accompaniment of all the other voices, even to the
lowest bass, which is to be regarded as the origin of all. The melody
itself enters as an integral part into the harmony, as the harmony enters
into it, and only thus, in the full harmonious whole, music expresses what
it aims at expressing. Thus also the one will outside of time finds its
full objectification only in the complete union of all the steps which
reveal its nature in the innumerable ascending grades of distinctness. The
following analogy is also very remarkable. We have seen in the preceding
book that notwithstanding the self-adaptation of all the phenomena of will
to each other as regards their species, which constitutes their
teleological aspect, there yet remains an unceasing conflict between those
phenomena as individuals, which is visible at every grade, and makes the
world a constant battle-field of all those manifestations of one and the
same will, whose inner contradiction with itself becomes visible through
it. In music also there is something corresponding to this. A complete,
pure, harmonious system of tones is not only physically but arithmetically
impossible. The numbers themselves by which the tones are expressed have
inextricable irrationality. There is no scale in which, when it is
counted, every fifth will be related to the keynote as 2 to 3, every major
third as 4 to 5, every minor third as 5 to 6, and so on. For if they are
correctly related to the keynote, they can no longer be so to each other;
because, for example, the fifth must be the minor third to the third, &c.
For the notes of the scale may be compared to actors who must play now one
part, now another. Therefore a perfectly accurate system of music cannot
even be thought, far less worked out; and on this account all possible
music deviates from perfect purity; it can only conceal the discords
essential to it by dividing them among all the notes, i.e., by
temperament. On this see Chladni’s “Akustik,” § 30, and his “Kurze
Uebersicht der Schall- und Klanglehre.”(63)

I might still have something to say about the way in which music is
perceived, namely, in and through time alone, with absolute exclusion of
space, and also apart from the influence of the knowledge of causality,
thus without understanding; for the tones make the æsthetic impression as
effect, and without obliging us to go back to their causes, as in the case
of perception. I do not wish, however, to lengthen this discussion, as I
have perhaps already gone too much into detail with regard to some things
in this Third Book, or have dwelt too much on particulars. But my aim made
it necessary, and it will be the less disapproved if the importance and
high worth of art, which is seldom sufficiently recognised, be kept in
mind. For if, according to our view, the whole visible world is just the
objectification, the mirror, of the will, conducting it to knowledge of
itself, and, indeed, as we shall soon see, to the possibility of its
deliverance; and if, at the same time, the world as idea, if we regard it
in isolation, and, freeing ourselves from all volition, allow it alone to
take possession of our consciousness, is the most joy-giving and the only
innocent side of life; we must regard art as the higher ascent, the more
complete development of all this, for it achieves essentially just what is
achieved by the visible world itself, only with greater concentration,
more perfectly, with intention and intelligence, and therefore may be
called, in the full significance of the word, the flower of life. If the
whole world as idea is only the visibility of will, the work of art is to
render this visibility more distinct. It is the camera obscura which
shows the objects more purely, and enables us to survey them and
comprehend them better. It is the play within the play, the stage upon the
stage in “Hamlet.”

The pleasure we receive from all beauty, the consolation which art
affords, the enthusiasm of the artist, which enables him to forget the
cares of life,—the latter an advantage of the man of genius over other
men, which alone repays him for the suffering that increases in proportion
to the clearness of consciousness, and for the desert loneliness among men
of a different race,—all this rests on the fact that the in-itself of
life, the will, existence itself, is, as we shall see farther on, a
constant sorrow, partly miserable, partly terrible; while, on the
contrary, as idea alone, purely contemplated, or copied by art, free from
pain, it presents to us a drama full of significance. This purely knowable
side of the world, and the copy of it in any art, is the element of the
artist. He is chained to the contemplation of the play, the
objectification of will; he remains beside it, does not get tired of
contemplating it and representing it in copies; and meanwhile he bears
himself the cost of the production of that play, i.e., he himself is the
will which objectifies itself, and remains in constant suffering. That
pure, true, and deep knowledge of the inner nature of the world becomes
now for him an end in itself: he stops there. Therefore it does not become
to him a quieter of the will, as, we shall see in the next book, it does
in the case of the saint who has attained to resignation; it does not
deliver him for ever from life, but only at moments, and is therefore not
for him a path out of life, but only an occasional consolation in it, till
his power, increased by this contemplation and at last tired of the play,
lays hold on the real. The St. Cecilia of Raphael may be regarded as a
representation of this transition. To the real, then, we now turn in the
following book.
