§ 1. “The world is my idea:”—this is a truth which holds good for
everything that lives and knows, though man alone can bring it into
reflective and abstract consciousness. If he really does this, he has
attained to philosophical wisdom. It then becomes clear and certain to him
that what he knows is not a sun and an earth, but only an eye that sees a
sun, a hand that feels an earth; that the world which surrounds him is
there only as idea, i.e., only in relation to something else, the
consciousness, which is himself. If any truth can be asserted a priori,
it is this: for it is the expression of the most general form of all
possible and thinkable experience: a form which is more general than time,
or space, or causality, for they all presuppose it; and each of these,
which we have seen to be just so many modes of the principle of sufficient
reason, is valid only for a particular class of ideas; whereas the
antithesis of object and subject is the common form of all these classes,
is that form under which alone any idea of whatever kind it may be,
abstract or intuitive, pure or empirical, is possible and thinkable. No
truth therefore is more certain, more independent of all others, and less
in need of proof than this, that all that exists for knowledge, and
therefore this whole world, is only object in relation to subject,
perception of a perceiver, in a word, idea. This is obviously true of the
past and the future, as well as of the present, of what is farthest off,
as of what is near; for it is true of time and space themselves, in which
alone these distinctions arise. All that in any way belongs or can belong
to the world is inevitably thus conditioned through the subject, and
exists only for the subject. The world is idea.

This truth is by no means new. It was implicitly involved in the sceptical
reflections from which Descartes started. Berkeley, however, was the first
who distinctly enunciated it, and by this he has rendered a permanent
service to philosophy, even though the rest of his teaching should not
endure. Kant’s primary mistake was the neglect of this principle, as is
shown in the appendix. How early again this truth was recognised by the
wise men of India, appearing indeed as the fundamental tenet of the
Vedânta philosophy ascribed to Vyasa, is pointed out by Sir William Jones
in the last of his essays: “On the philosophy of the Asiatics” (Asiatic
Researches, vol. iv. p. 164), where he says, “The fundamental tenet of the
Vedanta school consisted not in denying the existence of matter, that is,
of solidity, impenetrability, and extended figure (to deny which would be
lunacy), but in correcting the popular notion of it, and in contending
that it has no essence independent of mental perception; that existence
and perceptibility are convertible terms.” These words adequately express
the compatibility of empirical reality and transcendental ideality.

In this first book, then, we consider the world only from this side, only
so far as it is idea. The inward reluctance with which any one accepts the
world as merely his idea, warns him that this view of it, however true it
may be, is nevertheless one-sided, adopted in consequence of some
arbitrary abstraction. And yet it is a conception from which he can never
free himself. The defectiveness of this view will be corrected in the next
book by means of a truth which is not so immediately certain as that from
which we start here; a truth at which we can arrive only by deeper
research and more severe abstraction, by the separation of what is
different and the union of what is identical. This truth, which must be
very serious and impressive if not awful to every one, is that a man can
also say and must say, “the world is my will.”

In this book, however, we must consider separately that aspect of the
world from which we start, its aspect as knowable, and therefore, in the
meantime, we must, without reserve, regard all presented objects, even our
own bodies (as we shall presently show more fully), merely as ideas, and
call them merely ideas. By so doing we always abstract from will (as we
hope to make clear to every one further on), which by itself constitutes
the other aspect of the world. For as the world is in one aspect entirely
idea, so in another it is entirely will. A reality which is neither of
these two, but an object in itself (into which the thing in itself has
unfortunately dwindled in the hands of Kant), is the phantom of a dream,
and its acceptance is an ignis fatuus in philosophy.

§ 2. That which knows all things and is known by none is the subject. Thus
it is the supporter of the world, that condition of all phenomena, of all
objects which is always pre-supposed throughout experience; for all that
exists, exists only for the subject. Every one finds himself to be
subject, yet only in so far as he knows, not in so far as he is an object
of knowledge. But his body is object, and therefore from this point of
view we call it idea. For the body is an object among objects, and is
conditioned by the laws of objects, although it is an immediate object.
Like all objects of perception, it lies within the universal forms of
knowledge, time and space, which are the conditions of multiplicity. The
subject, on the contrary, which is always the knower, never the known,
does not come under these forms, but is presupposed by them; it has
therefore neither multiplicity nor its opposite unity. We never know it,
but it is always the knower wherever there is knowledge.

So then the world as idea, the only aspect in which we consider it at
present, has two fundamental, necessary, and inseparable halves. The one
half is the object, the forms of which are space and time, and through
these multiplicity. The other half is the subject, which is not in space
and time, for it is present, entire and undivided, in every percipient
being. So that any one percipient being, with the object, constitutes the
whole world as idea just as fully as the existing millions could do; but
if this one were to disappear, then the whole world as idea would cease to
be. These halves are therefore inseparable even for thought, for each of
the two has meaning and existence only through and for the other, each
appears with the other and vanishes with it. They limit each other
immediately; where the object begins the subject ends. The universality of
this limitation is shown by the fact that the essential and hence
universal forms of all objects, space, time, and causality, may, without
knowledge of the object, be discovered and fully known from a
consideration of the subject, i.e., in Kantian language, they lie a
priori in our consciousness. That he discovered this is one of Kant’s
principal merits, and it is a great one. I however go beyond this, and
maintain that the principle of sufficient reason is the general expression
for all these forms of the object of which we are a priori conscious;
and that therefore all that we know purely a priori, is merely the
content of that principle and what follows from it; in it all our certain
a priori knowledge is expressed. In my essay on the principle of
sufficient reason I have shown in detail how every possible object comes
under it; that is, stands in a necessary relation to other objects, on the
one side as determined, on the other side as determining: this is of such
wide application, that the whole existence of all objects, so far as they
are objects, ideas and nothing more, may be entirely traced to this their
necessary relation to each other, rests only in it, is in fact merely
relative; but of this more presently. I have further shown, that the
necessary relation which the principle of sufficient reason expresses
generally, appears in other forms corresponding to the classes into which
objects are divided, according to their possibility; and again that by
these forms the proper division of the classes is tested. I take it for
granted that what I said in this earlier essay is known and present to the
reader, for if it had not been already said it would necessarily find its
place here.

§ 3. The chief distinction among our ideas is that between ideas of
perception and abstract ideas. The latter form just one class of ideas,
namely concepts, and these are the possession of man alone of all
creatures upon earth. The capacity for these, which distinguishes him from
all the lower animals, has always been called reason.(5) We shall consider
these abstract ideas by themselves later, but, in the first place, we
shall speak exclusively of the ideas of perception. These comprehend the
whole visible world, or the sum total of experience, with the conditions
of its possibility. We have already observed that it is a highly important
discovery of Kant’s, that these very conditions, these forms of the
visible world, i.e., the absolutely universal element in its perception,
the common property of all its phenomena, space and time, even when taken
by themselves and apart from their content, can, not only be thought in
the abstract, but also be directly perceived; and that this perception or
intuition is not some kind of phantasm arising from constant recurrence in
experience, but is so entirely independent of experience that we must
rather regard the latter as dependent on it, inasmuch as the qualities of
space and time, as they are known in a priori perception or intuition,
are valid for all possible experience, as rules to which it must
invariably conform. Accordingly, in my essay on the principle of
sufficient reason, I have treated space and time, because they are
perceived as pure and empty of content, as a special and independent class
of ideas. This quality of the universal forms of intuition, which was
discovered by Kant, that they may be perceived in themselves and apart
from experience, and that they may be known as exhibiting those laws on
which is founded the infallible science of mathematics, is certainly very
important. Not less worthy of remark, however, is this other quality of
time and space, that the principle of sufficient reason, which conditions
experience as the law of causation and of motive, and thought as the law
of the basis of judgment, appears here in quite a special form, to which I
have given the name of the ground of being. In time, this is the
succession of its moments, and in space the position of its parts, which
reciprocally determine each other ad infinitum.

Any one who has fully understood from the introductory essay the complete
identity of the content of the principle of sufficient reason in all its
different forms, must also be convinced of the importance of the knowledge
of the simplest of these forms, as affording him insight into his own
inmost nature. This simplest form of the principle we have found to be
time. In it each instant is, only in so far as it has effaced the
preceding one, its generator, to be itself in turn as quickly effaced. The
past and the future (considered apart from the consequences of their
content) are empty as a dream, and the present is only the indivisible and
unenduring boundary between them. And in all the other forms of the
principle of sufficient reason, we shall find the same emptiness, and
shall see that not time only but also space, and the whole content of both
of them, i.e., all that proceeds from causes and motives, has a merely
relative existence, is only through and for another like to itself,
i.e., not more enduring. The substance of this doctrine is old: it
appears in Heraclitus when he laments the eternal flux of things; in Plato
when he degrades the object to that which is ever becoming, but never
being; in Spinoza as the doctrine of the mere accidents of the one
substance which is and endures. Kant opposes what is thus known as the
mere phenomenon to the thing in itself. Lastly, the ancient wisdom of the
Indian philosophers declares, “It is Mâyâ, the veil of deception, which
blinds the eyes of mortals, and makes them behold a world of which they
cannot say either that it is or that it is not: for it is like a dream; it
is like the sunshine on the sand which the traveller takes from afar for
water, or the stray piece of rope he mistakes for a snake.” (These similes
are repeated in innumerable passages of the Vedas and the Puranas.) But
what all these mean, and that of which they all speak, is nothing more
than what we have just considered—the world as idea subject to the
principle of sufficient reason.

§ 4. Whoever has recognised the form of the principle of sufficient
reason, which appears in pure time as such, and on which all counting and
arithmetical calculation rests, has completely mastered the nature of
time. Time is nothing more than that form of the principle of sufficient
reason, and has no further significance. Succession is the form of the
principle of sufficient reason in time, and succession is the whole nature
of time. Further, whoever has recognised the principle of sufficient
reason as it appears in the presentation of pure space, has exhausted the
whole nature of space, which is absolutely nothing more than that
possibility of the reciprocal determination of its parts by each other,
which is called position. The detailed treatment of this, and the
formulation in abstract conceptions of the results which flow from it, so
that they may be more conveniently used, is the subject of the science of
geometry. Thus also, whoever has recognised the law of causation, the
aspect of the principle of sufficient reason which appears in what fills
these forms (space and time) as objects of perception, that is to say
matter, has completely mastered the nature of matter as such, for matter
is nothing more than causation, as any one will see at once if he
reflects. Its true being is its action, nor can we possibly conceive it as
having any other meaning. Only as active does it fill space and time; its
action upon the immediate object (which is itself matter) determines that
perception in which alone it exists. The consequence of the action of any
material object upon any other, is known only in so far as the latter acts
upon the immediate object in a different way from that in which it acted
before; it consists only of this. Cause and effect thus constitute the
whole nature of matter; its true being is its action. (A fuller treatment
of this will be found in the essay on the Principle of Sufficient Reason,
§ 21, p. 77.) The nature of all material things is therefore very
appropriately called in German Wirklichkeit,(6) a word which is far more
expressive than Realität. Again, that which is acted upon is always
matter, and thus the whole being and essence of matter consists in the
orderly change, which one part of it brings about in another part. The
existence of matter is therefore entirely relative, according to a
relation which is valid only within its limits, as in the case of time and
space.

But time and space, each for itself, can be mentally presented apart from
matter, whereas matter cannot be so presented apart from time and space.
The form which is inseparable from it presupposes space, and the action in
which its very existence consists, always imports some change, in other
words a determination in time. But space and time are not only, each for
itself, presupposed by matter, but a union of the two constitutes its
essence, for this, as we have seen, consists in action, i.e., in
causation. All the innumerable conceivable phenomena and conditions of
things, might be coexistent in boundless space, without limiting each
other, or might be successive in endless time without interfering with
each other: thus a necessary relation of these phenomena to each other,
and a law which should regulate them according to such a relation, is by
no means needful, would not, indeed, be applicable: it therefore follows
that in the case of all co-existence in space and change in time, so long
as each of these forms preserves for itself its condition and its course
without any connection with the other, there can be no causation, and
since causation constitutes the essential nature of matter, there can be
no matter. But the law of causation receives its meaning and necessity
only from this, that the essence of change does not consist simply in the
mere variation of things, but rather in the fact that at the same part of
space there is now one thing and then another, and at one and the
same point of time there is here one thing and there another: only
this reciprocal limitation of space and time by each other gives meaning,
and at the same time necessity, to a law, according to which change must
take place. What is determined by the law of causality is therefore not
merely a succession of things in time, but this succession with reference
to a definite space, and not merely existence of things in a particular
place, but in this place at a different point of time. Change, i.e.,
variation which takes place according to the law of causality, implies
always a determined part of space and a determined part of time together
and in union. Thus causality unites space with time. But we found that the
whole essence of matter consisted in action, i.e., in causation,
consequently space and time must also be united in matter, that is to say,
matter must take to itself at once the distinguishing qualities both of
space and time, however much these may be opposed to each other, and must
unite in itself what is impossible for each of these independently, that
is, the fleeting course of time, with the rigid unchangeable perduration
of space: infinite divisibility it receives from both. It is for this
reason that we find that co-existence, which could neither be in time
alone, for time has no contiguity, nor in space alone, for space has no
before, after, or now, is first established through matter. But the
co-existence of many things constitutes, in fact, the essence of reality,
for through it permanence first becomes possible; for permanence is only
knowable in the change of something which is present along with what is
permanent, while on the other hand it is only because something permanent
is present along with what changes, that the latter gains the special
character of change, i.e., the mutation of quality and form in the
permanence of substance, that is to say, in matter.(7) If the world were
in space alone, it would be rigid and immovable, without succession,
without change, without action; but we know that with action, the idea of
matter first appears. Again, if the world were in time alone, all would be
fleeting, without persistence, without contiguity, hence without
co-existence, and consequently without permanence; so that in this case
also there would be no matter. Only through the union of space and time do
we reach matter, and matter is the possibility of co-existence, and,
through that, of permanence; through permanence again matter is the
possibility of the persistence of substance in the change of its
states.(8) As matter consists in the union of space and time, it bears
throughout the stamp of both. It manifests its origin in space, partly
through the form which is inseparable from it, but especially through its
persistence (substance), the a priori certainty of which is therefore
wholly deducible from that of space(9) (for variation belongs to time
alone, but in it alone and for itself nothing is persistent). Matter shows
that it springs from time by quality (accidents), without which it never
exists, and which is plainly always causality, action upon other matter,
and therefore change (a time concept). The law of this action, however,
always depends upon space and time together, and only thus obtains
meaning. The regulative function of causality is confined entirely to the
determination of what must occupy this time and this space. The fact
that we know a priori the unalterable characteristics of matter, depends
upon this derivation of its essential nature from the forms of our
knowledge of which we are conscious a priori. These unalterable
characteristics are space-occupation, i.e., impenetrability, i.e.,
causal action, consequently, extension, infinite divisibility,
persistence, i.e., indestructibility, and lastly mobility: weight, on
the other hand, notwithstanding its universality, must be attributed to a
posteriori knowledge, although Kant, in his “Metaphysical Introduction to
Natural Philosophy,” p. 71 (p. 372 of Rosenkranz’s edition), treats it as
knowable a priori.

But as the object in general is only for the subject, as its idea, so
every special class of ideas is only for an equally special quality in the
subject, which is called a faculty of perception. This subjective
correlative of time and space in themselves as empty forms, has been named
by Kant pure sensibility; and we may retain this expression, as Kant was
the first to treat of the subject, though it is not exact, for sensibility
presupposes matter. The subjective correlative of matter or of causation,
for these two are the same, is understanding, which is nothing more than
this. To know causality is its one function, its only power; and it is a
great one, embracing much, of manifold application, yet of unmistakable
identity in all its manifestations. Conversely all causation, that is to
say, all matter, or the whole of reality, is only for the understanding,
through the understanding, and in the understanding. The first, simplest,
and ever-present example of understanding is the perception of the actual
world. This is throughout knowledge of the cause from the effect, and
therefore all perception is intellectual. The understanding could never
arrive at this perception, however, if some effect did not become known
immediately, and thus serve as a starting-point. But this is the affection
of the animal body. So far, then, the animal body is the immediate
object of the subject; the perception of all other objects becomes
possible through it. The changes which every animal body experiences, are
immediately known, that is, felt; and as these effects are at once
referred to their causes, the perception of the latter as objects
arises. This relation is no conclusion in abstract conceptions; it does
not arise from reflection, nor is it arbitrary, but immediate, necessary,
and certain. It is the method of knowing of the pure understanding,
without which there could be no perception; there would only remain a dull
plant-like consciousness of the changes of the immediate object, which
would succeed each other in an utterly unmeaning way, except in so far as
they might have a meaning for the will either as pain or pleasure. But as
with the rising of the sun the visible world appears, so at one stroke,
the understanding, by means of its one simple function, changes the dull,
meaningless sensation into perception. What the eye, the ear, or the hand
feels, is not perception; it is merely its data. By the understanding
passing from the effect to the cause, the world first appears as
perception extended in space, varying in respect of form, persistent
through all time in respect of matter; for the understanding unites space
and time in the idea of matter, that is, causal action. As the world as
idea exists only through the understanding, so also it exists only for the
understanding. In the first chapter of my essay on “Light and Colour,” I
have already explained how the understanding constructs perceptions out of
the data supplied by the senses; how by comparison of the impressions
which the various senses receive from the object, a child arrives at
perceptions; how this alone affords the solution of so many phenomena of
the senses; the single vision of two eyes, the double vision in the case
of a squint, or when we try to look at once at objects which lie at
unequal distances behind each other; and all illusion which is produced by
a sudden alteration in the organs of sense. But I have treated this
important subject much more fully and thoroughly in the second edition of
the essay on “The Principle of Sufficient Reason,” § 21. All that is said
there would find its proper place here, and would therefore have to be
said again; but as I have almost as much disinclination to quote myself as
to quote others, and as I am unable to explain the subject better than it
is explained there, I refer the reader to it, instead of quoting it, and
take for granted that it is known.

The process by which children, and persons born blind who have been
operated upon, learn to see, the single vision of the double sensation of
two eyes, the double vision and double touch which occur when the organs
of sense have been displaced from their usual position, the upright
appearance of objects while the picture on the retina is upside down, the
attributing of colour to the outward objects, whereas it is merely an
inner function, a division through polarisation, of the activity of the
eye, and lastly the stereoscope,—all these are sure and incontrovertible
evidence that perception is not merely of the senses, but
intellectual—that is, pure knowledge through the understanding of the
cause from the effect, and that, consequently, it presupposes the law of
causality, in a knowledge of which all perception—that is to say all
experience, by virtue of its primary and only possibility, depends. The
contrary doctrine that the law of causality results from experience, which
was the scepticism of Hume, is first refuted by this. For the independence
of the knowledge of causality of all experience,—that is, its a priori
character—can only be deduced from the dependence of all experience upon
it; and this deduction can only be accomplished by proving, in the manner
here indicated, and explained in the passages referred to above, that the
knowledge of causality is included in perception in general, to which all
experience belongs, and therefore in respect of experience is completely
a priori, does not presuppose it, but is presupposed by it as a
condition. This, however, cannot be deduced in the manner attempted by
Kant, which I have criticised in the essay on “The Principle of Sufficient
Reason,” § 23.

§ 5. It is needful to guard against the grave error of supposing that
because perception arises through the knowledge of causality, the relation
of subject and object is that of cause and effect. For this relation
subsists only between the immediate object and objects known indirectly,
thus always between objects alone. It is this false supposition that has
given rise to the foolish controversy about the reality of the outer
world; a controversy in which dogmatism and scepticism oppose each other,
and the former appears, now as realism, now as idealism. Realism treats
the object as cause, and the subject as its effect. The idealism of Fichte
reduces the object to the effect of the subject. Since however, and this
cannot be too much emphasised, there is absolutely no relation according
to the principle of sufficient reason between subject and object, neither
of these views could be proved, and therefore scepticism attacked them
both with success. Now, just as the law of causality precedes perception
and experience as their condition, and therefore cannot (as Hume thought)
be derived from them, so object and subject precede all knowledge, and
hence the principle of sufficient reason in general, as its first
condition; for this principle is merely the form of all objects, the whole
nature and possibility of their existence as phenomena: but the object
always presupposes the subject; and therefore between these two there can
be no relation of reason and consequent. My essay on the principle of
sufficient reason accomplishes just this: it explains the content of that
principle as the essential form of every object—that is to say, as the
universal nature of all objective existence, as something which pertains
to the object as such; but the object as such always presupposes the
subject as its necessary correlative; and therefore the subject remains
always outside the province in which the principle of sufficient reason is
valid. The controversy as to the reality of the outer world rests upon
this false extension of the validity of the principle of sufficient reason
to the subject also, and starting with this mistake it can never
understand itself. On the one side realistic dogmatism, looking upon the
idea as the effect of the object, desires to separate these two, idea and
object, which are really one, and to assume a cause quite different from
the idea, an object in itself, independent of the subject, a thing which
is quite inconceivable; for even as object it presupposes subject, and so
remains its idea. Opposed to this doctrine is scepticism, which makes the
same false presupposition that in the idea we have only the effect, never
the cause, therefore never real being; that we always know merely the
action of the object. But this object, it supposes, may perhaps have no
resemblance whatever to its effect, may indeed have been quite erroneously
received as the cause, for the law of causality is first to be gathered
from experience, and the reality of experience is then made to rest upon
it. Thus both of these views are open to the correction, firstly, that
object and idea are the same; secondly, that the true being of the object
of perception is its action, that the reality of the thing consists in
this, and the demand for an existence of the object outside the idea of
the subject, and also for an essence of the actual thing different from
its action, has absolutely no meaning, and is a contradiction: and that
the knowledge of the nature of the effect of any perceived object,
exhausts such an object itself, so far as it is object, i.e., idea, for
beyond this there is nothing more to be known. So far then, the perceived
world in space and time, which makes itself known as causation alone, is
entirely real, and is throughout simply what it appears to be, and it
appears wholly and without reserve as idea, bound together according to
the law of causality. This is its empirical reality. On the other hand,
all causality is in the understanding alone, and for the understanding.
The whole actual, that is, active world is determined as such through the
understanding, and apart from it is nothing. This, however, is not the
only reason for altogether denying such a reality of the outer world as is
taught by the dogmatist, who explains its reality as its independence of
the subject. We also deny it, because no object apart from a subject can
be conceived without contradiction. The whole world of objects is and
remains idea, and therefore wholly and for ever determined by the subject;
that is to say, it has transcendental ideality. But it is not therefore
illusion or mere appearance; it presents itself as that which it is, idea,
and indeed as a series of ideas of which the common bond is the principle
of sufficient reason. It is according to its inmost meaning quite
comprehensible to the healthy understanding, and speaks a language quite
intelligible to it. To dispute about its reality can only occur to a mind
perverted by over-subtilty, and such discussion always arises from a false
application of the principle of sufficient reason, which binds all ideas
together of whatever kind they may be, but by no means connects them with
the subject, nor yet with a something which is neither subject nor object,
but only the ground of the object; an absurdity, for only objects can be
and always are the ground of objects. If we examine more closely the
source of this question as to the reality of the outer world, we find that
besides the false application of the principle of sufficient reason
generally to what lies beyond its province, a special confusion of its
forms is also involved; for that form which it has only in reference to
concepts or abstract ideas, is applied to perceived ideas, real objects;
and a ground of knowing is demanded of objects, whereas they can have
nothing but a ground of being. Among the abstract ideas, the concepts
united in the judgment, the principle of sufficient reason appears in such
a way that each of these has its worth, its validity, and its whole
existence, here called truth, simply and solely through the relation of
the judgment to something outside of it, its ground of knowledge, to which
there must consequently always be a return. Among real objects, ideas of
perception, on the other hand, the principle of sufficient reason appears
not as the principle of the ground of knowing, but of being, as the
law of causality: every real object has paid its debt to it, inasmuch as
it has come to be, i.e., has appeared as the effect of a cause. The
demand for a ground of knowing has therefore here no application and no
meaning, but belongs to quite another class of things. Thus the world of
perception raises in the observer no question or doubt so long as he
remains in contact with it: there is here neither error nor truth, for
these are confined to the province of the abstract—the province of
reflection. But here the world lies open for sense and understanding;
presents itself with naive truth as that which it really is—ideas of
perception which develop themselves according to the law of causality.

So far as we have considered the question of the reality of the outer
world, it arises from a confusion which amounts even to a misunderstanding
of reason itself, and therefore thus far, the question could be answered
only by explaining its meaning. After examination of the whole nature of
the principle of sufficient reason, of the relation of subject and object,
and the special conditions of sense perception, the question itself
disappeared because it had no longer any meaning. There is, however, one
other possible origin of this question, quite different from the purely
speculative one which we have considered, a specially empirical origin,
though the question is always raised from a speculative point of view, and
in this form it has a much more comprehensible meaning than it had in the
first. We have dreams; may not our whole life be a dream? or more exactly:
is there a sure criterion of the distinction between dreams and reality?
between phantasms and real objects? The assertion that what is dreamt is
less vivid and distinct than what we actually perceive is not to the
point, because no one has ever been able to make a fair comparison of the
two; for we can only compare the recollection of a dream with the present
reality. Kant answers the question thus: “The connection of ideas among
themselves, according to the law of causality, constitutes the difference
between real life and dreams.” But in dreams, as well as in real life,
everything is connected individually at any rate, in accordance with the
principle of sufficient reason in all its forms, and this connection is
broken only between life and dreams, or between one dream and another.
Kant’s answer therefore could only run thus:—the long dream (life) has
throughout complete connection according to the principle of sufficient
reason; it has not this connection, however, with short dreams, although
each of these has in itself the same connection: the bridge is therefore
broken between the former and the latter, and on this account we
distinguish them.

But to institute an inquiry according to this criterion, as to whether
something was dreamt or seen, would always be difficult and often
impossible. For we are by no means in a position to trace link by link the
causal connection between any experienced event and the present moment,
but we do not on that account explain it as dreamt. Therefore in real life
we do not commonly employ that method of distinguishing between dreams and
reality. The only sure criterion by which to distinguish them is in fact
the entirely empirical one of awaking, through which at any rate the
causal connection between dreamed events and those of waking life, is
distinctly and sensibly broken off. This is strongly supported by the
remark of Hobbes in the second chapter of Leviathan, that we easily
mistake dreams for reality if we have unintentionally fallen asleep
without taking off our clothes, and much more so when it also happens that
some undertaking or design fills all our thoughts, and occupies our dreams
as well as our waking moments. We then observe the awaking just as little
as the falling asleep, dream and reality run together and become
confounded. In such a case there is nothing for it but the application of
Kant’s criterion; but if, as often happens, we fail to establish by means
of this criterion, either the existence of causal connection with the
present, or the absence of such connection, then it must for ever remain
uncertain whether an event was dreamt or really happened. Here, in fact,
the intimate relationship between life and dreams is brought out very
clearly, and we need not be ashamed to confess it, as it has been
recognised and spoken of by many great men. The Vedas and Puranas have no
better simile than a dream for the whole knowledge of the actual world,
which they call the web of Mâyâ, and they use none more frequently. Plato
often says that men live only in a dream; the philosopher alone strives to
awake himself. Pindar says (ii. η. 135): σκιας οναρ ανθρωπος (umbræ
somnium homo), and Sophocles:—


    Ὀνω γυν ἡμας ουδεν οντας αλλο, πλην
    Σιδωλ᾽ ὁσοιπερ ζωμεν, ὴ κουφην σκιαν.—Ajax, 125.


(Nos enim, quicunque vivimus, nihil aliud esse comperio quam simulacra et
levem umbram.) Beside which most worthily stands Shakespeare:—


          “We are such stuff
    As dreams are made on, and our little life
    Is rounded with a sleep.”—Tempest, Act iv. Sc. 1.


Lastly, Calderon was so deeply impressed with this view of life that he
sought to embody it in a kind of metaphysical drama—“Life a Dream.”

After these numerous quotations from the poets, perhaps I also may be
allowed to express myself by a metaphor. Life and dreams are leaves of the
same book. The systematic reading of this book is real life, but when the
reading hours (that is, the day) are over, we often continue idly to turn
over the leaves, and read a page here and there without method or
connection: often one we have read before, sometimes one that is new to
us, but always in the same book. Such an isolated page is indeed out of
connection with the systematic study of the book, but it does not seem so
very different when we remember that the whole continuous perusal begins
and ends just as abruptly, and may therefore be regarded as merely a
larger single page.

Thus although individual dreams are distinguished from real life by the
fact that they do not fit into that continuity which runs through the
whole of experience, and the act of awaking brings this into
consciousness, yet that very continuity of experience belongs to real life
as its form, and the dream on its part can point to a similar continuity
in itself. If, therefore, we consider the question from a point of view
external to both, there is no distinct difference in their nature, and we
are forced to concede to the poets that life is a long dream.

Let us turn back now from this quite independent empirical origin of the
question of the reality of the outer world, to its speculative origin. We
found that this consisted, first, in the false application of the
principle of sufficient reason to the relation of subject and object; and
secondly, in the confusion of its forms, inasmuch as the principle of
sufficient reason of knowing was extended to a province in which the
principle of sufficient reason of being is valid. But the question could
hardly have occupied philosophers so constantly if it were entirely devoid
of all real content, and if some true thought and meaning did not lie at
its heart as its real source. Accordingly, we must assume that when the
element of truth that lies at the bottom of the question first came into
reflection and sought its expression, it became involved in these confused
and meaningless forms and problems. This at least is my opinion, and I
think that the true expression of that inmost meaning of the question,
which it failed to find, is this:—What is this world of perception besides
being my idea? Is that of which I am conscious only as idea, exactly like
my own body, of which I am doubly conscious, in one aspect as idea, in
another aspect as will? The fuller explanation of this question and its
answer in the affirmative, will form the content of the second book, and
its consequences will occupy the remaining portion of this work.

§ 6. For the present, however, in this first book we consider everything
merely as idea, as object for the subject. And our own body, which is the
starting-point for each of us in our perception of the world, we consider,
like all other real objects, from the side of its knowableness, and in
this regard it is simply an idea. Now the consciousness of every one is in
general opposed to the explanation of objects as mere ideas, and more
especially to the explanation of our bodies as such; for the thing in
itself is known to each of us immediately in so far as it appears as our
own body; but in so far as it objectifies itself in the other objects of
perception, it is known only indirectly. But this abstraction, this
one-sided treatment, this forcible separation of what is essentially and
necessarily united, is only adopted to meet the demands of our argument;
and therefore the disinclination to it must, in the meantime, be
suppressed and silenced by the expectation that the subsequent treatment
will correct the one-sidedness of the present one, and complete our
knowledge of the nature of the world.

At present therefore the body is for us immediate object; that is to say,
that idea which forms the starting-point of the subject’s knowledge;
because the body, with its immediately known changes, precedes the
application of the law of causality, and thus supplies it with its first
data. The whole nature of matter consists, as we have seen, in its causal
action. But cause and effect exist only for the understanding, which is
nothing but their subjective correlative. The understanding, however,
could never come into operation if there were not something else from
which it starts. This is simple sensation—the immediate consciousness of
the changes of the body, by virtue of which it is immediate object. Thus
the possibility of knowing the world of perception depends upon two
conditions; the first, objectively expressed, is the power of material
things to act upon each other, to produce changes in each other, without
which common quality of all bodies no perception would be possible, even
by means of the sensibility of the animal body. And if we wish to express
this condition subjectively we say: The understanding first makes
perception possible; for the law of causality, the possibility of effect
and cause, springs only from the understanding, and is valid only for it,
and therefore the world of perception exists only through and for it. The
second condition is the sensibility of animal bodies, or the quality of
being immediate objects of the subject which certain bodies possess. The
mere modification which the organs of sense sustain from without through
their specific affections, may here be called ideas, so far as these
affections produce neither pain nor pleasure, that is, have no immediate
significance for the will, and are yet perceived, exist therefore only for
knowledge. Thus far, then, I say that the body is immediately known,
is immediate object. But the conception of object is not to be taken
here in its fullest sense, for through this immediate knowledge of the
body, which precedes the operation of the understanding, and is mere
sensation, our own body does not exist specifically as object, but first
the material things which affect it: for all knowledge of an object
proper, of an idea perceived in space, exists only through and for the
understanding; therefore not before, but only subsequently to its
operation. Therefore the body as object proper, that is, as an idea
perceived in space, is first known indirectly, like all other objects,
through the application of the law of causality to the action of one of
its parts upon another, as, for example, when the eye sees the body or the
hand touches it. Consequently the form of our body does not become known
to us through mere feeling, but only through knowledge, only in idea; that
is to say, only in the brain does our own body first come to appear as
extended, articulate, organic. A man born blind receives this idea only
little by little from the data afforded by touch. A blind man without
hands could never come to know his own form; or at the most could infer
and construct it little by little from the effects of other bodies upon
him. If, then, we call the body an immediate object, we are to be
understood with these reservations.

In other respects, then, according to what has been said, all animal
bodies are immediate objects; that is, starting-points for the subject
which always knows and therefore is never known in its perception of the
world. Thus the distinctive characteristic of animal life is knowledge,
with movement following on motives, which are determined by knowledge,
just as movement following on stimuli is the distinctive characteristic of
plant-life. Unorganised matter, however, has no movement except such as is
produced by causes properly so called, using the term in its narrowest
sense. All this I have thoroughly discussed in my essay on the principle
of sufficient reason, § 20, in the “Ethics,” first essay, iii., and in my
work on Sight and Colour, § 1, to which I therefore refer.

It follows from what has been said, that all animals, even the least
developed, have understanding; for they all know objects, and this
knowledge determines their movements as motive. Understanding is the same
in all animals and in all men; it has everywhere the same simple form;
knowledge of causality, transition from effect to cause, and from cause to
effect, nothing more; but the degree of its acuteness, and the extension
of the sphere of its knowledge varies enormously, with innumerable
gradations from the lowest form, which is only conscious of the causal
connection between the immediate object and objects affecting it—that is
to say, perceives a cause as an object in space by passing to it from the
affection which the body feels, to the higher grades of knowledge of the
causal connection among objects known indirectly, which extends to the
understanding of the most complicated system of cause and effect in
nature. For even this high degree of knowledge is still the work of the
understanding, not of the reason. The abstract concepts of the reason can
only serve to take up the objective connections which are immediately
known by the understanding, to make them permanent for thought, and to
relate them to each other; but reason never gives us immediate knowledge.
Every force and law of nature, every example of such forces and laws, must
first be immediately known by the understanding, must be apprehended
through perception before it can pass into abstract consciousness for
reason. Hooke’s discovery of the law of gravitation, and the reference of
so many important phenomena to this one law, was the work of immediate
apprehension by the understanding; and such also was the proof of Newton’s
calculations, and Lavoisier’s discovery of acids and their important
function in nature, and also Goethe’s discovery of the origin of physical
colours. All these discoveries are nothing more than a correct immediate
passage from the effect to the cause, which is at once followed by the
recognition of the ideality of the force of nature which expresses itself
in all causes of the same kind; and this complete insight is just an
example of that single function of the understanding, by which an animal
perceives as an object in space the cause which affects its body, and
differs from such a perception only in degree. Every one of these great
discoveries is therefore, just like perception, an operation of the
understanding, an immediate intuition, and as such the work of an instant,
an apperçu, a flash of insight. They are not the result of a process of
abstract reasoning, which only serves to make the immediate knowledge of
the understanding permanent for thought by bringing it under abstract
concepts, i.e., it makes knowledge distinct, it puts us in a position to
impart it and explain it to others. The keenness of the understanding in
apprehending the causal relations of objects which are known indirectly,
does not find its only application in the sphere of natural science
(though all the discoveries in that sphere are due to it), but it also
appears in practical life. It is then called good sense or prudence, as in
its other application it is better called acuteness, penetration,
sagacity. More exactly, good sense or prudence signifies exclusively
understanding at the command of the will. But the limits of these
conceptions must not be too sharply defined, for it is always that one
function of the understanding by means of which all animals perceive
objects in space, which, in its keenest form, appears now in the phenomena
of nature, correctly inferring the unknown causes from the given effects,
and providing the material from which the reason frames general rules as
laws of nature; now inventing complicated and ingenious machines by
adapting known causes to desired effects; now in the sphere of motives,
seeing through and frustrating intrigues and machinations, or fitly
disposing the motives and the men who are susceptible to them, setting
them in motion, as machines are moved by levers and wheels, and directing
them at will to the accomplishment of its ends. Deficiency of
understanding is called stupidity. It is just dulness in applying the
law of causality, incapacity for the immediate apprehension of the
concatenations of causes and effects, motives and actions. A stupid person
has no insight into the connection of natural phenomena, either when they
follow their own course, or when they are intentionally combined, i.e.,
are applied to machinery. Such a man readily believes in magic and
miracles. A stupid man does not observe that persons, who apparently act
independently of each other, are really in collusion; he is therefore
easily mystified, and outwitted; he does not discern the hidden motives of
proffered advice or expressions of opinion, &c. But it is always just one
thing that he lacks—keenness, rapidity, ease in applying the law of
causality, i.e., power of understanding. The greatest, and, in this
reference, the most instructive example of stupidity I ever met with, was
the case of a totally imbecile boy of about eleven years of age, in an
asylum. He had reason, because he spoke and comprehended, but in respect
of understanding he was inferior to many of the lower animals. Whenever I
visited him he noticed an eye-glass which I wore round my neck, and in
which the window of the room and the tops of the trees beyond were
reflected: on every occasion he was greatly surprised and delighted with
this, and was never tired of looking at it with astonishment, because he
did not understand the immediate causation of reflection.

While the difference in degree of the acuteness of the understanding, is
very great between man and man, it is even greater between one species of
animal and another. In all species of animals, even those which are
nearest to plants, there is at least as much understanding as suffices for
the inference from the effect on the immediate object, to the indirectly
known object as its cause, i.e., sufficient for perception, for the
apprehension of an object. For it is this that constitutes them animals,
as it gives them the power of movement following on motives, and thereby
the power of seeking for food, or at least of seizing it; whereas plants
have only movement following on stimuli, whose direct influence they must
await, or else decay, for they cannot seek after them nor appropriate
them. We marvel at the great sagacity of the most developed species of
animals, such as the dog, the elephant, the monkey or the fox, whose
cleverness has been so admirably sketched by Buffon. From these most
sagacious animals, we can pretty accurately determine how far
understanding can go without reason, i.e., abstract knowledge embodied
in concepts. We could not find this out from ourselves, for in us
understanding and reason always reciprocally support each other. We find
that the manifestation of understanding in animals is sometimes above our
expectation, and sometimes below it. On the one hand, we are surprised at
the sagacity of the elephant, who, after crossing many bridges during his
journey in Europe, once refused to go upon one, because he thought it was
not strong enough to bear his weight, though he saw the rest of the party,
consisting of men and horses, go upon it as usual. On the other hand, we
wonder that the intelligent Orang-outangs, who warm themselves at a fire
they have found, do not keep it alight by throwing wood on it; a proof
that this requires a deliberation which is not possible without abstract
concepts. It is clear that the knowledge of cause and effect, as the
universal form of understanding, belongs to all animals a priori,
because to them as to us it is the prior condition of all perception of
the outer world. If any one desires additional proof of this, let him
observe, for example, how a young dog is afraid to jump down from a table,
however much he may wish to do so, because he foresees the effect of the
weight of his body, though he has not been taught this by experience. In
judging of the understanding of animals, we must guard against ascribing
to it the manifestations of instinct, a faculty which is quite distinct
both from understanding and reason, but the action of which is often very
analogous to the combined action of the two. We cannot, however, discuss
this here; it will find its proper place in the second book, when we
consider the harmony or so-called teleology of nature: and the 27th
chapter of the supplementary volume is expressly devoted to it.

Deficiency of understanding we call stupidity: deficiency in the
application of reason to practice we shall recognise later as
foolishness: deficiency of judgment as silliness, and lastly, partial
or entire deficiency of memory as madness. But each of these will be
considered in its own place. That which is correctly known by reason is
truth, that is, an abstract judgment on sufficient grounds (Essay on the
Principle of Sufficient Reason, § 29 and following paragraphs); that which
is correctly known by understanding is reality, that is correct
inference from effect on the immediate object to its cause. Error is
opposed to truth, as deception of the reason: illusion is opposed to
reality, as deception of the understanding. The full discussion of all
this will be found in the first chapter of my essay on Light and Colour.
Illusion takes place when the same effect may be attributed to two causes,
of which one occurs very frequently, the other very seldom; the
understanding having no data to decide which of these two causes operates
in any particular case,—for their effects are exactly alike,—always
assumes the presence of the commoner cause, and as the activity of the
understanding is not reflective and discursive, but direct and immediate,
this false cause appears before us as a perceived object, whereas it is
merely illusion. I have explained in the essay referred to, how in this
way double sight and double feeling take place if the organs of sense are
brought into an unusual position; and have thus given an incontrovertible
proof that perception exists only through and for the understanding. As
additional examples of such illusions or deceptions of the understanding,
we may mention the broken appearance of a stick dipped in water; the
reflections in spherical mirrors, which, when the surface is convex appear
somewhat behind it, and when the surface is concave appear a long way in
front of it. To this class also belongs the apparently greater extension
of the moon at the horizon than at the zenith. This appearance is not
optical, for as the micrometre proves, the eye receives the image of the
moon at the zenith, at an even greater angle of vision than at the
horizon. The mistake is due to the understanding, which assumes that the
cause of the feebler light of the moon and of all stars at the horizon is
that they are further off, thus treating them as earthly objects,
according to the laws of atmospheric perspective, and therefore it takes
the moon to be much larger at the horizon than at the zenith, and also
regards the vault of heaven as more extended or flattened out at the
horizon. The same false application of the laws of atmospheric perspective
leads us to suppose that very high mountains, whose summits alone are
visible in pure transparent air, are much nearer than they really are, and
therefore not so high as they are; for example, Mont Blanc seen from
Salenche. All such illusions are immediately present to us as perceptions,
and cannot be dispelled by any arguments of the reason. Reason can only
prevent error, that is, a judgment on insufficient grounds, by opposing to
it a truth; as for example, the abstract knowledge that the cause of the
weaker light of the moon and the stars at the horizon is not greater
distance, but the denser atmosphere; but in all the cases we have referred
to, the illusion remains in spite of every abstract explanation. For the
understanding is in itself, even in the case of man, irrational, and is
completely and sharply distinguished from the reason, which is a faculty
of knowledge that belongs to man alone. The reason can only know;
perception remains free from its influence and belongs to the
understanding alone.

§ 7. With reference to our exposition up to this point, it must be
observed that we did not start either from the object or the subject, but
from the idea, which contains and presupposes them both; for the
antithesis of object and subject is its primary, universal and essential
form. We have therefore first considered this form as such; then (though
in this respect reference has for the most part been made to the
introductory essay) the subordinate forms of time, space and causality.
The latter belong exclusively to the object, and yet, as they are
essential to the object as such, and as the object again is essential to
the subject as such, they may be discovered from the subject, i.e.,
they may be known a priori, and so far they are to be regarded as the
common limits of both. But all these forms may be referred to one general
expression, the principle of sufficient reason, as we have explained in
the introductory essay.

This procedure distinguishes our philosophical method from that of all
former systems. For they all start either from the object or from the
subject, and therefore seek to explain the one from the other, and this
according to the principle of sufficient reason. We, on the contrary, deny
the validity of this principle with reference to the relation of subject
and object, and confine it to the object. It may be thought that the
philosophy of identity, which has appeared and become generally known in
our own day, does not come under either of the alternatives we have named,
for it does not start either from the subject or from the object, but from
the absolute, known through “intellectual intuition,” which is neither
object nor subject, but the identity of the two. I will not venture to
speak of this revered identity, and this absolute, for I find myself
entirely devoid of all “intellectual intuition.” But as I take my stand
merely on those manifestoes of the “intellectual intuiter” which are open
to all, even to profane persons like myself, I must yet observe that this
philosophy is not to be excepted from the alternative errors mentioned
above. For it does not escape these two opposite errors in spite of its
identity of subject and object, which is not thinkable, but only
“intellectually intuitable,” or to be experienced by a losing of oneself
in it. On the contrary, it combines them both in itself; for it is divided
into two parts, firstly, transcendental idealism, which is just Fichte’s
doctrine of the ego, and therefore teaches that the object is produced
by the subject, or evolved out of it in accordance with the principle of
sufficient reason; secondly, the philosophy of nature, which teaches that
the subject is produced little by little from the object, by means of a
method called construction, about which I understand very little, yet
enough to know that it is a process according to various forms of the
principle of sufficient reason. The deep wisdom itself which that
construction contains, I renounce; for as I entirely lack “intellectual
intuition,” all those expositions which presuppose it must for me remain
as a book sealed with seven seals. This is so truly the case that, strange
to say, I have always been unable to find anything at all in this doctrine
of profound wisdom but atrocious and wearisome bombast.

The systems starting from the object had always the whole world of
perception and its constitution as their problem; yet the object which
they take as their starting-point is not always this whole world of
perception, nor its fundamental element, matter. On the contrary, a
division of these systems may be made, based on the four classes of
possible objects set forth in the introductory essay. Thus Thales and the
Ionic school, Democritus, Epicurus, Giordano Bruno, and the French
materialists, may be said to have started from the first class of objects,
the real world: Spinoza (on account of his conception of substance, which
is purely abstract, and exists only in his definition) and, earlier, the
Eleatics, from the second class, the abstract conception: the Pythagoreans
and Chinese philosophy in Y-King, from the third class, time, and
consequently number: and, lastly, the schoolmen, who teach a creation out
of nothing by the act of will of an extra-mundane personal being, started
from the fourth class of objects, the act of will directed by knowledge.

Of all systems of philosophy which start from the object, the most
consistent, and that which may be carried furthest, is simple materialism.
It regards matter, and with it time and space, as existing absolutely, and
ignores the relation to the subject in which alone all this really exists.
It then lays hold of the law of causality as a guiding principle or clue,
regarding it as a self-existent order (or arrangement) of things, veritas
aeterna, and so fails to take account of the understanding, in which and
for which alone causality is. It seeks the primary and most simple state
of matter, and then tries to develop all the others from it; ascending
from mere mechanism, to chemism, to polarity, to the vegetable and to the
animal kingdom. And if we suppose this to have been done, the last link in
the chain would be animal sensibility—that is knowledge—which would
consequently now appear as a mere modification or state of matter produced
by causality. Now if we had followed materialism thus far with clear
ideas, when we reached its highest point we would suddenly be seized with
a fit of the inextinguishable laughter of the Olympians. As if waking from
a dream, we would all at once become aware that its final
result—knowledge, which it reached so laboriously, was presupposed as the
indispensable condition of its very starting-point, mere matter; and when
we imagined that we thought matter, we really thought only the subject
that perceives matter; the eye that sees it, the hand that feels it, the
understanding that knows it. Thus the tremendous petitio principii
reveals itself unexpectedly; for suddenly the last link is seen to be the
starting-point, the chain a circle, and the materialist is like Baron
Münchausen who, when swimming in water on horseback, drew the horse into
the air with his legs, and himself also by his cue. The fundamental
absurdity of materialism is that it starts from the objective, and takes
as the ultimate ground of explanation something objective, whether it be
matter in the abstract, simply as it is thought, or after it has taken
form, is empirically given—that is to say, is substance, the chemical
element with its primary relations. Some such thing it takes, as existing
absolutely and in itself, in order that it may evolve organic nature and
finally the knowing subject from it, and explain them adequately by means
of it; whereas in truth all that is objective is already determined as
such in manifold ways by the knowing subject through its forms of knowing,
and presupposes them; and consequently it entirely disappears if we think
the subject away. Thus materialism is the attempt to explain what is
immediately given us by what is given us indirectly. All that is
objective, extended, active—that is to say, all that is material—is
regarded by materialism as affording so solid a basis for its explanation,
that a reduction of everything to this can leave nothing to be desired
(especially if in ultimate analysis this reduction should resolve itself
into action and reaction). But we have shown that all this is given
indirectly and in the highest degree determined, and is therefore merely a
relatively present object, for it has passed through the machinery and
manufactory of the brain, and has thus come under the forms of space, time
and causality, by means of which it is first presented to us as extended
in space and ever active in time. From such an indirectly given object,
materialism seeks to explain what is immediately given, the idea (in which
alone the object that materialism starts with exists), and finally even
the will from which all those fundamental forces, that manifest
themselves, under the guidance of causes, and therefore according to law,
are in truth to be explained. To the assertion that thought is a
modification of matter we may always, with equal right, oppose the
contrary assertion that all matter is merely the modification of the
knowing subject, as its idea. Yet the aim and ideal of all natural science
is at bottom a consistent materialism. The recognition here of the obvious
impossibility of such a system establishes another truth which will appear
in the course of our exposition, the truth that all science properly so
called, by which I understand systematic knowledge under the guidance of
the principle of sufficient reason, can never reach its final goal, nor
give a complete and adequate explanation: for it is not concerned with the
inmost nature of the world, it cannot get beyond the idea; indeed, it
really teaches nothing more than the relation of one idea to another.

Every science must start from two principal data. One of these is always
the principle of sufficient reason in some form or another, as organon;
the other is its special object as problem. Thus, for example, geometry
has space as problem, and the ground of existence in space as organon.
Arithmetic has time as problem, and the ground of existence in time as
organon. Logic has the combination of concepts as such as problem, and the
ground of knowledge as organon. History has the past acts of men treated
as a whole as problem, and the law of human motives as organon. Natural
science has matter as problem, and the law of causality as organon. Its
end and aim is therefore, by the guidance of causality, to refer all
possible states of matter to other states, and ultimately to one single
state; and again to deduce these states from each other, and ultimately
from one single state. Thus two states of matter stand over against each
other in natural science as extremes: that state in which matter is
furthest from being the immediate object of the subject, and that state in
which it is most completely such an immediate object, i.e., the most
dead and crude matter, the primary element, as the one extreme, and the
human organism as the other. Natural science as chemistry seeks for the
first, as physiology for the second. But as yet neither extreme has been
reached, and it is only in the intermediate ground that something has been
won. The prospect is indeed somewhat hopeless. The chemists, under the
presupposition that the qualitative division of matter is not, like
quantitative division, an endless process, are always trying to decrease
the number of the elements, of which there are still about sixty; and if
they were to succeed in reducing them to two, they would still try to find
the common root of these. For, on the one hand, the law of homogeneity
leads to the assumption of a primary chemical state of matter, which alone
belongs to matter as such, and precedes all others which are not
essentially matter as such, but merely contingent forms and qualities. On
the other hand, we cannot understand how this one state could ever
experience a chemical change, if there did not exist a second state to
affect it. Thus the same difficulty appears in chemistry which Epicurus
met with in mechanics. For he had to show how the first atom departed from
the original direction of its motion. Indeed this contradiction, which
develops entirely of itself and can neither be escaped nor solved, might
quite properly be set up as a chemical antinomy. Thus an antinomy
appears in the one extreme of natural science, and a corresponding one
will appear in the other. There is just as little hope of reaching this
opposite extreme of natural science, for we see ever more clearly that
what is chemical can never be referred to what is mechanical, nor what is
organic to what is chemical or electrical. Those who in our own day are
entering anew on this old, misleading path, will soon slink back silent
and ashamed, as all their predecessors have done before them. We shall
consider this more fully in the second book. Natural science encounters
the difficulties which we have cursorily mentioned, in its own province.
Regarded as philosophy, it would further be materialism; but this, as we
have seen, even at its birth, has death in its heart, because it ignores
the subject and the forms of knowledge, which are presupposed, just as
much in the case of the crudest matter, from which it desires to start, as
in that of the organism, at which it desires to arrive. For, “no object
without a subject,” is the principle which renders all materialism for
ever impossible. Suns and planets without an eye that sees them, and an
understanding that knows them, may indeed be spoken of in words, but for
the idea, these words are absolutely meaningless. On the other hand, the
law of causality and the treatment and investigation of nature which is
based upon it, lead us necessarily to the conclusion that, in time, each
more highly organised state of matter has succeeded a cruder state: so
that the lower animals existed before men, fishes before land animals,
plants before fishes, and the unorganised before all that is organised;
that, consequently, the original mass had to pass through a long series of
changes before the first eye could be opened. And yet, the existence of
this whole world remains ever dependent upon the first eye that opened,
even if it were that of an insect. For such an eye is a necessary
condition of the possibility of knowledge, and the whole world exists only
in and for knowledge, and without it is not even thinkable. The world is
entirely idea, and as such demands the knowing subject as the supporter of
its existence. This long course of time itself, filled with innumerable
changes, through which matter rose from form to form till at last the
first percipient creature appeared,—this whole time itself is only
thinkable in the identity of a consciousness whose succession of ideas,
whose form of knowing it is, and apart from which, it loses all meaning
and is nothing at all. Thus we see, on the one hand, the existence of the
whole world necessarily dependent upon the first conscious being, however
undeveloped it may be; on the other hand, this conscious being just as
necessarily entirely dependent upon a long chain of causes and effects
which have preceded it, and in which it itself appears as a small link.
These two contradictory points of view, to each of which we are led with
the same necessity, we might again call an antinomy in our faculty of
knowledge, and set it up as the counterpart of that which we found in the
first extreme of natural science. The fourfold antinomy of Kant will be
shown, in the criticism of his philosophy appended to this volume, to be a
groundless delusion. But the necessary contradiction which at last
presents itself to us here, finds its solution in the fact that, to use
Kant’s phraseology, time, space, and causality do not belong to the
thing-in-itself, but only to its phenomena, of which they are the form;
which in my language means this: The objective world, the world as idea,
is not the only side of the world, but merely its outward side; and it has
an entirely different side—the side of its inmost nature—its kernel—the
thing-in-itself. This we shall consider in the second book, calling it
after the most immediate of its objective manifestations—will. But the
world as idea, with which alone we are here concerned, only appears with
the opening of the first eye. Without this medium of knowledge it cannot
be, and therefore it was not before it. But without that eye, that is to
say, outside of knowledge, there was also no before, no time. Thus time
has no beginning, but all beginning is in time. Since, however, it is the
most universal form of the knowable, in which all phenomena are united
together through causality, time, with its infinity of past and future, is
present in the beginning of knowledge. The phenomenon which fills the
first present must at once be known as causally bound up with and
dependent upon a sequence of phenomena which stretches infinitely into the
past, and this past itself is just as truly conditioned by this first
present, as conversely the present is by the past. Accordingly the past
out of which the first present arises, is, like it, dependent upon the
knowing subject, without which it is nothing. It necessarily happens,
however, that this first present does not manifest itself as the first,
that is, as having no past for its parent, but as being the beginning of
time. It manifests itself rather as the consequence of the past, according
to the principle of existence in time. In the same way, the phenomena
which fill this first present appear as the effects of earlier phenomena
which filled the past, in accordance with the law of causality. Those who
like mythological interpretations may take the birth of Kronos (χρονος),
the youngest of the Titans, as a symbol of the moment here referred to at
which time appears, though, indeed it has no beginning; for with him,
since he ate his father, the crude productions of heaven and earth cease,
and the races of gods and men appear upon the scene.

This explanation at which we have arrived by following the most consistent
of the philosophical systems which start from the object, materialism, has
brought out clearly the inseparable and reciprocal dependence of subject
and object, and at the same time the inevitable antithesis between them.
And this knowledge leads us to seek for the inner nature of the world, the
thing-in-itself, not in either of the two elements of the idea, but in
something quite distinct from it, and which is not encumbered with such a
fundamental and insoluble antithesis.

Opposed to the system we have explained, which starts from the object in
order to derive the subject from it, is the system which starts from the
subject and tries to derive the object from it. The first of these has
been of frequent and common occurrence throughout the history of
philosophy, but of the second we find only one example, and that a very
recent one; the “philosophy of appearance” of J. G. Fichte. In this
respect, therefore, it must be considered; little real worth or inner
meaning as the doctrine itself had. It was indeed for the most part merely
a delusion, but it was delivered with an air of the deepest earnestness,
with sustained loftiness of tone and zealous ardour, and was defended with
eloquent polemic against weak opponents, so that it was able to present a
brilliant exterior and seemed to be something. But the genuine earnestness
which keeps truth always steadfastly before it as its goal, and is
unaffected by any external influences, was entirely wanting to Fichte, as
it is to all philosophers who, like him, concern themselves with questions
of the day. In his case, indeed, it could not have been otherwise. A man
becomes a philosopher by reason of a certain perplexity, from which he
seeks to free himself. This is Plato’s θαυμαξειν, which he calls a μαλα
φιλοσοφικον παθος. But what distinguishes the false philosopher from the
true is this: the perplexity of the latter arises from the contemplation
of the world itself, while that of the former results from some book, some
system of philosophy which is before him. Now Fichte belongs to the class
of the false philosophers. He was made a philosopher by Kant’s doctrine of
the thing-in-itself, and if it had not been for this he would probably
have pursued entirely different ends, with far better results, for he
certainly possessed remarkable rhetorical talent. If he had only
penetrated somewhat deeply into the meaning of the book that made him a
philosopher, “The Critique of Pure Reason,” he would have understood that
its principal teaching about mind is this. The principle of sufficient
reason is not, as all scholastic philosophy maintains, a veritas
aeterna—that is to say, it does not possess an unconditioned validity
before, outside of, and above the world. It is relative and conditioned,
and valid only in the sphere of phenomena, and thus it may appear as the
necessary nexus of space and time, or as the law of causality, or as the
law of the ground of knowledge. The inner nature of the world, the
thing-in-itself can never be found by the guidance of this principle, for
all that it leads to will be found to be dependent and relative and merely
phenomenal, not the thing-in-itself. Further, it does not concern the
subject, but is only the form of objects, which are therefore not
things-in-themselves. The subject must exist along with the object, and
the object along with the subject, so that it is impossible that subject
and object can stand to each other in a relation of reason and consequent.
But Fichte did not take up the smallest fragment of all this. All that
interested him about the matter was that the system started from the
subject. Now Kant had chosen this procedure in order to show the fallacy
of the prevalent systems, which started from the object, and through which
the object had come, to be regarded as a thing-in-itself. Fichte, however,
took this departure from the subject for the really important matter, and
like all imitators, he imagined that in going further than Kant he was
surpassing him. Thus he repeated the fallacy with regard to the subject,
which all the previous dogmatism had perpetrated with regard to the
object, and which had been the occasion of Kant’s “Critique”. Fichte then
made no material change, and the fundamental fallacy, the assumption of a
relation of reason and consequent between object and subject, remained
after him as it was before him. The principle of sufficient reason
possessed as before an unconditioned validity, and the only difference was
that the thing-in-itself was now placed in the subject instead of, as
formerly, in the object. The entire relativity of both subject and object,
which proves that the thing-in-itself, or the inner nature of the world,
is not to be sought in them at all, but outside of them, and outside
everything else that exists merely relatively, still remained unknown.
Just as if Kant had never existed, the principle of sufficient reason is
to Fichte precisely what it was to all the schoolmen, a veritas aeterna.
As an eternal fate reigned over the gods of old, so these aeternæ
veritates, these metaphysical, mathematical and metalogical truths, and
in the case of some, the validity of the moral law also, reigned over the
God of the schoolmen. These veritates alone were independent of
everything, and through their necessity both God and the world existed.
According to the principle of sufficient reason, as such a veritas
aeterna, the ego is for Fichte the ground of the world, or of the
non-ego, the object, which is just its consequent, its creation. He has
therefore taken good care to avoid examining further or limiting the
principle of sufficient reason. If, however, it is thought I should
specify the form of the principle of sufficient reason under the guidance
of which Fichte derives the non-ego from the ego, as a spider spins
its web out of itself, I find that it is the principle of sufficient
reason of existence in space: for it is only as referred to this that some
kind of meaning and sense can be attached to the laboured deductions of
the way in which the ego produces and fabricates the non-ego from
itself, which form the content of the most senseless, and consequently the
most wearisome book that was ever written. This philosophy of Fichte,
otherwise not worth mentioning, is interesting to us only as the tardy
expression of the converse of the old materialism. For materialism was the
most consistent system starting from the object, as this is the most
consistent system starting from the subject. Materialism overlooked the
fact that, with the simplest object, it assumed the subject also; and
Fichte overlooked the fact that with the subject (whatever he may call it)
he assumed the object also, for no subject is thinkable without an object.
Besides this he forgot that all a priori deduction, indeed all
demonstration in general, must rest upon some necessity, and that all
necessity is based on the principle of sufficient reason, because to be
necessary, and to follow from given grounds are convertible
conceptions.(10) But the principle of sufficient reason is just the
universal form of the object as such. Thus it is in the object, but is not
valid before and outside of it; it first produces the object and makes it
appear in conformity with its regulative principle. We see then that the
system which starts from the subject contains the same fallacy as the
system, explained above, which starts from the object; it begins by
assuming what it proposes to deduce, the necessary correlative of its
starting-point.

The method of our own system is toto genere distinct from these two
opposite misconceptions, for we start neither from the object nor from the
subject, but from the idea, as the first fact of consciousness. Its
first essential, fundamental form is the antithesis of subject and object.
The form of the object again is the principle of sufficient reason in its
various forms. Each of these reigns so absolutely in its own class of
ideas that, as we have seen, when the special form of the principle of
sufficient reason which governs any class of ideas is known, the nature of
the whole class is known also: for the whole class, as idea, is no more
than this form of the principle of sufficient reason itself; so that time
itself is nothing but the principle of existence in it, i.e.,
succession; space is nothing but the principle of existence in it, i.e.,
position; matter is nothing but causality; the concept (as will appear
immediately) is nothing but relation to a ground of knowledge. This
thorough and consistent relativity of the world as idea, both according to
its universal form (subject and object), and according to the form which
is subordinate to this (the principle of sufficient reason) warns us, as
we said before, to seek the inner nature of the world in an aspect of it
which is quite different and quite distinct from the idea; and in the
next book we shall find this in a fact which is just as immediate to every
living being as the idea.

But we must first consider that class of ideas which belongs to man alone.
The matter of these is the concept, and the subjective correlative is
reason, just as the subjective correlative of the ideas we have already
considered was understanding and sensibility, which are also to be
attributed to all the lower animals.(11)

§ 8. As from the direct light of the sun to the borrowed light of the
moon, we pass from the immediate idea of perception, which stands by
itself and is its own warrant, to reflection, to the abstract, discursive
concepts of the reason, which obtain their whole content from knowledge of
perception, and in relation to it. As long as we continue simply to
perceive, all is clear, firm, and certain. There are neither questions nor
doubts nor errors; we desire to go no further, can go no further; we find
rest in perceiving, and satisfaction in the present. Perception suffices
for itself, and therefore what springs purely from it, and remains true to
it, for example, a genuine work of art, can never be false, nor can it be
discredited through the lapse of time, for it does not present an opinion
but the thing itself. But with abstract knowledge, with reason, doubt and
error appear in the theoretical, care and sorrow in the practical. In the
idea of perception, illusion may at moments take the place of the real;
but in the sphere of abstract thought, error may reign for a thousand
years, impose its yoke upon whole nations, extend to the noblest impulses
of humanity, and, by the help of its slaves and its dupes, may chain and
fetter those whom it cannot deceive. It is the enemy against which the
wisest men of all times have waged unequal war, and only what they have
won from it has become the possession of mankind. Therefore it is well to
draw attention to it at once, as we already tread the ground to which its
province belongs. It has often been said that we ought to follow truth
even although no utility can be seen in it, because it may have indirect
utility which may appear when it is least expected; and I would add to
this, that we ought to be just as anxious to discover and to root out all
error even when no harm is anticipated from it, because its mischief may
be very indirect, and may suddenly appear when we do not expect it, for
all error has poison at its heart. If it is mind, if it is knowledge, that
makes man the lord of creation, there can be no such thing as harmless
error, still less venerable and holy error. And for the consolation of
those who in any way and at any time may have devoted strength and life to
the noble and hard battle against error, I cannot refrain from adding
that, so long as truth is absent, error will have free play, as owls and
bats in the night; but sooner would we expect to see the owls and the bats
drive back the sun in the eastern heavens, than that any truth which has
once been known and distinctly and fully expressed, can ever again be so
utterly vanquished and overcome that the old error shall once more reign
undisturbed over its wide kingdom. This is the power of truth; its
conquest is slow and laborious, but if once the victory be gained it can
never be wrested back again.

Besides the ideas we have as yet considered, which, according to their
construction, could be referred to time, space, and matter, if we consider
them with reference to the object, or to pure sensibility and
understanding (i.e., knowledge of causality), if we consider them with
reference to the subject, another faculty of knowledge has appeared in man
alone of all earthly creatures, an entirely new consciousness, which, with
very appropriate and significant exactness, is called reflection. For it
is in fact derived from the knowledge of perception, and is a reflected
appearance of it. But it has assumed a nature fundamentally different. The
forms of perception do not affect it, and even the principle of sufficient
reason which reigns over all objects has an entirely different aspect with
regard to it. It is just this new, more highly endowed, consciousness,
this abstract reflex of all that belongs to perception in that conception
of the reason which has nothing to do with perception, that gives to man
that thoughtfulness which distinguishes his consciousness so entirely from
that of the lower animals, and through which his whole behaviour upon
earth is so different from that of his irrational fellow-creatures. He far
surpasses them in power and also in suffering. They live in the present
alone, he lives also in the future and the past. They satisfy the needs of
the moment, he provides by the most ingenious preparations for the future,
yea for days that he shall never see. They are entirely dependent on the
impression of the moment, on the effect of the perceptible motive; he is
determined by abstract conceptions independent of the present. Therefore
he follows predetermined plans, he acts from maxims, without reference to
his surroundings or the accidental impression of the moment. Thus, for
example, he can make with composure deliberate preparations for his own
death, he can dissemble past finding out, and can carry his secret with
him to the grave; lastly, he has an actual choice between several motives;
for only in the abstract can such motives, present together in
consciousness, afford the knowledge with regard to themselves, that the
one excludes the other, and can thus measure themselves against each other
with reference to their power over the will. The motive that overcomes, in
that it decides the question at issue, is the deliberate determinant of
the will, and is a sure indication of its character. The brute, on the
other hand, is determined by the present impression; only the fear of
present compulsion can constrain its desires, until at last this fear has
become custom, and as such continues to determine it; this is called
training. The brute feels and perceives; man, in addition to this,
thinks and knows: both will. The brute expresses its feelings and
dispositions by gestures and sounds; man communicates his thought to
others, or, if he wishes, he conceals it, by means of speech. Speech is
the first production, and also the necessary organ of his reason.
Therefore in Greek and Italian, speech and reason are expressed by the
same word; ὁ λογος, il discorso. Vernunft is derived from vernehmen,
which is not a synonym for the verb to hear, but signifies the
consciousness of the meaning of thoughts communicated in words. It is by
the help of language alone that reason accomplishes its most important
achievements,—the united action of several individuals, the planned
co-operation of many thousands, civilisation, the state; also science, the
storing up of experience, the uniting of common properties in one concept,
the communication of truth, the spread of error, thoughts and poems,
dogmas and superstitions. The brute first knows death when it dies, but
man draws consciously nearer to it every hour that he lives; and this
makes life at times a questionable good even to him who has not recognised
this character of constant annihilation in the whole of life. Principally
on this account man has philosophies and religions, though it is uncertain
whether the qualities we admire most in his conduct, voluntary rectitude
and nobility of feeling, were ever the fruit of either of them. As results
which certainly belong only to them, and as productions of reason in this
sphere, we may refer to the marvellous and monstrous opinions of
philosophers of various schools, and the extraordinary and sometimes cruel
customs of the priests of different religions.

It is the universal opinion of all times and of all nations that these
manifold and far-reaching achievements spring from a common principle,
from that peculiar intellectual power which belongs distinctively to man
and which has been called reason, ὁ λογος, το λογιστικον, το λογιμον,
ratio. Besides this, no one finds any difficulty in recognising the
manifestations of this faculty, and in saying what is rational and what is
irrational, where reason appears as distinguished from the other faculties
and qualities of man, or lastly, in pointing out what, on account of the
want of reason, we must never expect even from the most sensible brute.
The philosophers of all ages may be said to be on the whole at one about
this general knowledge of reason, and they have also given prominence to
several very important manifestations of it; such as, the control of the
emotions and passions, the capacity for drawing conclusions and
formulating general principles, even such as are true prior to all
experience, and so forth. Still all their explanations of the peculiar
nature of reason are wavering, not clearly defined, discursive, without
unity and concentration; now laying stress on one manifestation, now on
another, and therefore often at variance with each other. Besides this,
many start from the opposition between reason and revelation, a
distinction which is unknown to philosophy, and which only increases
confusion. It is very remarkable that up till now no philosopher has
referred these manifold expressions of reason to one simple function which
would be recognised in them all, from which they would all be explained,
and which would therefore constitute the real inner nature of reason. It
is true that the excellent Locke in the “Essay on the Human Understanding”
(Book II., ch. xi., §§ 10 and 11), very rightly refers to general concepts
as the characteristic which distinguishes man from the brutes, and
Leibnitz quotes this with full approval in the “Nouveaux Essais sur
l’Entendement Humaine” (Book II., ch. xi., §§ 10 and 11.) But when Locke
(in Book IV., ch. xvii., §§ 2 and 3) comes to the special explanation of
reason he entirely loses sight of this simple, primary characteristic, and
he also falls into a wavering, undetermined, incomplete account of mangled
and derivative manifestations of it. Leibnitz also, in the corresponding
part of his work, behaves in a similar manner, only with more confusion
and indistinctness. In the Appendix, I have fully considered how Kant
confused and falsified the conception of the nature of reason. But whoever
will take the trouble to go through in this reference the mass of
philosophical writing which has appeared since Kant, will find out, that
just as the faults of princes must be expiated by whole nations, the
errors of great minds extend their influence over whole generations, and
even over centuries; they grow and propagate themselves, and finally
degenerate into monstrosities. All this arises from the fact that, as
Berkeley says, “Few men think; yet all will have opinions.”

The understanding has only one function—immediate knowledge of the
relation of cause and effect. Yet the perception of the real world, and
all common sense, sagacity, and inventiveness, however multifarious their
applications may be, are quite clearly seen to be nothing more than
manifestations of that one function. So also the reason has one function;
and from it all the manifestations of reason we have mentioned, which
distinguish the life of man from that of the brutes, may easily be
explained. The application or the non-application of this function is all
that is meant by what men have everywhere and always called rational and
irrational.(12)

§ 9. Concepts form a distinct class of ideas, existing only in the mind of
man, and entirely different from the ideas of perception which we have
considered up till now. We can therefore never attain to a sensuous and,
properly speaking, evident knowledge of their nature, but only to a
knowledge which is abstract and discursive. It would, therefore, be absurd
to demand that they should be verified in experience, if by experience is
meant the real external world, which consists of ideas of perception, or
that they should be brought before the eyes or the imagination like
objects of perception. They can only be thought, not perceived, and only
the effects which men accomplish through them are properly objects of
experience. Such effects are language, preconceived and planned action and
science, and all that results from these. Speech, as an object of outer
experience, is obviously nothing more than a very complete telegraph,
which communicates arbitrary signs with the greatest rapidity and the
finest distinctions of difference. But what do these signs mean? How are
they interpreted? When some one speaks, do we at once translate his words
into pictures of the fancy, which instantaneously flash upon us, arrange
and link themselves together, and assume form and colour according to the
words that are poured forth, and their grammatical inflections? What a
tumult there would be in our brains while we listened to a speech, or to
the reading of a book? But what actually happens is not this at all. The
meaning of a speech is, as a rule, immediately grasped, accurately and
distinctly taken in, without the imagination being brought into play. It
is reason which speaks to reason, keeping within its own province. It
communicates and receives abstract conceptions, ideas that cannot be
presented in perceptions, which are framed once for all, and are
relatively few in number, but which yet encompass, contain, and represent
all the innumerable objects of the actual world. This itself is sufficient
to prove that the lower animals can never learn to speak or comprehend,
although they have the organs of speech and ideas of perception in common
with us. But because words represent this perfectly distinct class of
ideas, whose subjective correlative is reason, they are without sense and
meaning for the brutes. Thus language, like every other manifestation
which we ascribe to reason, and like everything which distinguishes man
from the brutes, is to be explained from this as its one simple
source—conceptions, abstract ideas which cannot be presented in
perception, but are general, and have no individual existence in space and
time. Only in single cases do we pass from the conception to the
perception, do we construct images as representatives of concepts in
perception, to which, however, they are never adequate. These cases are
fully discussed in the essay on the principle of sufficient reason, § 28,
and therefore I shall not repeat my explanation here. It may be compared,
however, with what is said by Hume in the twelfth of his “Philosophical
Essays,” p. 244, and by Herder in the “Metacritik,” pt. i. p. 274 (an
otherwise worthless book). The Platonic idea, the possibility of which
depends upon the union of imagination and reason, is the principal subject
of the third book of this work.

Although concepts are fundamentally different from ideas of perception,
they stand in a necessary relation to them, without which they would be
nothing. This relation therefore constitutes the whole nature and
existence of concepts. Reflection is the necessary copy or repetition of
the originally presented world of perception, but it is a special kind of
copy in an entirely different material. Thus concepts may quite properly
be called ideas of ideas. The principle of sufficient reason has here also
a special form. Now we have seen that the form under which the principle
of sufficient reason appears in a class of ideas always constitutes and
exhausts the whole nature of the class, so far as it consists of ideas, so
that time is throughout succession, and nothing more; space is throughout
position, and nothing more; matter is throughout causation, and nothing
more. In the same way the whole nature of concepts, or the class of
abstract ideas, consists simply in the relation which the principle of
sufficient reason expresses in them; and as this is the relation to the
ground of knowledge, the whole nature of the abstract idea is simply and
solely its relation to another idea, which is its ground of knowledge.
This, indeed, may, in the first instance, be a concept, an abstract idea,
and this again may have only a similar abstract ground of knowledge; but
the chain of grounds of knowledge does not extend ad infinitum; it must
end at last in a concept which has its ground in knowledge of perception;
for the whole world of reflection rests on the world of perception as its
ground of knowledge. Hence the class of abstract ideas is in this respect
distinguished from other classes; in the latter the principle of
sufficient reason always demands merely a relation to another idea of the
same class, but in the case of abstract ideas, it at last demands a
relation to an idea of another class.

Those concepts which, as has just been pointed out, are not immediately
related to the world of perception, but only through the medium of one, or
it may be several other concepts, have been called by preference
abstracta, and those which have their ground immediately in the world of
perception have been called concreta. But this last name is only loosely
applicable to the concepts denoted by it, for they are always merely
abstracta, and not ideas of perception. These names, which have
originated in a very dim consciousness of the distinctions they imply, may
yet, with this explanation, be retained. As examples of the first kind of
concepts, i.e., abstracta in the fullest sense, we may take
“relation,” “virtue,” “investigation,” “beginning,” and so on. As examples
of the second kind, loosely called concreta, we may take such concepts
as “man,” “stone,” “horse,” &c. If it were not a somewhat too pictorial
and therefore absurd simile, we might very appropriately call the latter
the ground floor, and the former the upper stories of the building of
reflection.(13)

It is not, as is commonly supposed, an essential characteristic of a
concept that it should contain much under it, that is to say, that many
ideas of perception, or it may be other abstract ideas, should stand to it
in the relation of its ground of knowledge, i.e., be thought through it.
This is merely a derived and secondary characteristic, and, as a matter of
fact, does not always exist, though it must always exist potentially. This
characteristic arises from the fact that a concept is an idea of an idea,
i.e., its whole nature consists in its relation to another idea; but as
it is not this idea itself, which is generally an idea of perception and
therefore belongs to quite a different class, the latter may have
temporal, spacial, and other determinations, and in general many relations
which are not thought along with it in the concept. Thus we see that
several ideas which are different in unessential particulars may be
thought by means of one concept, i.e., may be brought under it. Yet this
power of embracing several things is not an essential but merely an
accidental characteristic of the concept. There may be concepts through
which only one real object is thought, but which are nevertheless abstract
and general, by no means capable of presentation individually and as
perceptions. Such, for example, is the conception which any one may have
of a particular town which he only knows from geography; although only
this one town is thought under it, it might yet be applied to several
towns differing in certain respects. We see then that a concept is not
general because of being abstracted from several objects; but conversely,
because generality, that is to say, non-determination of the particular,
belongs to the concept as an abstract idea of the reason, different things
can be thought by means of the same one.

It follows from what has been said that every concept, just because it is
abstract and incapable of presentation in perception, and is therefore not
a completely determined idea, has what is called extension or sphere, even
in the case in which only one real object exists that corresponds to it.
Now we always find that the sphere of one concept has something in common
with the sphere of other concepts. That is to say, part of what is thought
under one concept is the same as what is thought under other concepts; and
conversely, part of what is thought under these concepts is the same as
what is thought under the first; although, if they are really different
concepts, each of them, or at least one of them, contains something which
the other does not contain; this is the relation in which every subject
stands to its predicate. The recognition of this relation is called
judgment. The representation of these spheres by means of figures in
space, is an exceedingly happy idea. It first occurred to Gottfried
Plouquet, who used squares for the purpose. Lambert, although later than
him, used only lines, which he placed under each other. Euler carried out
the idea completely with circles. Upon what this complete analogy between
the relations of concepts, and those of figures in space, ultimately
rests, I am unable to say. It is, however, a very fortunate circumstance
for logic that all the relations of concepts, according to their
possibility, i.e., a priori, may be made plain in perception by the
use of such figures, in the following way:—

(1.) The spheres of two concepts coincide: for example the concept of
necessity and the concept of following from given grounds, in the same way
the concepts of Ruminantia and Bisulca (ruminating and cloven-hoofed
animals), also those of vertebrate and red-blooded animals (although there
might be some doubt about this on account of the annelida): they are
convertible concepts. Such concepts are represented by a single circle
which stands for either of them.

(2.) The sphere of one concept includes that of the other.

        [Illustration: Category "horse" within category "animal".]

(3.) A sphere includes two or more spheres which exclude each other and
fill it.

[Illustration: Circle divided into thirds "right", "acute", and "obtuse".]

(4.) Two spheres include each a part of the other.

   [Illustration: Two overlapping circles, one "flower" and one "red".]

(5.) Two spheres lie in a third, but do not fill it.

   [Illustration: A large circle, "matter", within which are two other
                      circles, "water" and "earth".]

This last case applies to all concepts whose spheres have nothing
immediately in common, for there is always a third sphere, often a much
wider one, which includes both.

To these cases all combinations of concepts may be referred, and from them
the entire doctrine of the judgment, its conversion, contraposition,
equipollence, disjunction (this according to the third figure) may be
deduced. From these also may be derived the properties of the judgment,
upon which Kant based his pretended categories of the understanding, with
the exception however of the hypothetical form, which is not a combination
of concepts, but of judgments. A full account is given in the Appendix of
“Modality,” and indeed of every property of judgments on which the
categories are founded.

With regard to the possible combinations of concepts which we have given,
it has only further to be remarked that they may also be combined with
each other in many ways. For example, the fourth figure with the second.
Only if one sphere, which partly or wholly contains another, is itself
contained in a third sphere, do these together exemplify the syllogism in
the first figure, i.e., that combination of judgments, by means of which
it is known that a concept which is partly or wholly contained in another
concept, is also contained in a third concept, which again contains the
first: and also, conversely, the negation; the pictorial representation of
which can, of course, only be two connected spheres which do not lie
within a third sphere. If many spheres are brought together in this way we
get a long train of syllogisms. This schematism of concepts, which has
already been fairly well explained in more than one textbook, may be used
as the foundation of the doctrine of the judgment, and indeed of the whole
syllogistic theory, and in this way the treatment of both becomes very
easy and simple. Because, through it, all syllogistic rules may be seen in
their origin, and may be deduced and explained. It is not necessary,
however, to load the memory with these rules, as logic is never of
practical use, but has only a theoretical interest for philosophy. For
although it may be said that logic is related to rational thinking as
thorough-bass is to music, or less exactly, as ethics is to virtue, or
æsthetics to art; we must yet remember that no one ever became an artist
by the study of æsthetics; that a noble character was never formed by the
study of ethics; that long before Rameau, men composed correctly and
beautifully, and that we do not need to know thorough-bass in order to
detect discords: and just as little do we need to know logic in order to
avoid being misled by fallacies. Yet it must be conceded that
thorough-bass is of the greatest use in the practice of musical
composition, although it may not be necessary for the understanding of it;
and indeed æsthetics and even ethics, though in a much less degree, and
for the most part negatively, may be of some use in practice, so that we
cannot deny them all practical worth, but of logic even this much cannot
be conceded. It is nothing more than the knowledge in the abstract of what
every one knows in the concrete. Therefore we call in the aid of logical
rules, just as little to enable us to construct a correct argument as to
prevent us from consenting to a false one, and the most learned logician
lays aside the rules of logic altogether in his actual thought. This may
be explained in the following way. Every science is a system of general
and therefore abstract truths, laws, and rules with reference to a special
class of objects. The individual case coming under these laws is
determined in accordance with this general knowledge, which is valid once
for all; because such application of the general principle is far easier
than the exhaustive investigation of the particular case; for the general
abstract knowledge which has once been obtained is always more within our
reach than the empirical investigation of the particular case. With logic,
however, it is just the other way. It is the general knowledge of the mode
of procedure of the reason expressed in the form of rules. It is reached
by the introspection of reason, and by abstraction from all content. But
this mode of procedure is necessary and essential to reason, so that it
will never depart from it if left to itself. It is, therefore, easier and
surer to let it proceed itself according to its nature in each particular
case, than to present to it the knowledge abstracted from this procedure
in the form of a foreign and externally given law. It is easier, because,
while in the case of all other sciences, the general rule is more within
our reach than the investigation of the particular case taken by itself;
with the use of reason, on the contrary, its necessary procedure in a
given case is always more within our reach than the general rule
abstracted from it; for that which thinks in us is reason itself. It is
surer, because a mistake may more easily occur in such abstract knowledge,
or in its application, than that a process of reason should take place
which would run contrary to its essence and nature. Hence arises the
remarkable fact, that while in other sciences the particular case is
always proved by the rule, in logic, on the contrary, the rule must always
be proved from the particular case; and even the most practised logician,
if he remark that in some particular case he concludes otherwise than the
rule prescribes, will always expect to find a mistake in the rule rather
than in his own conclusion. To desire to make practical use of logic
means, therefore, to desire to derive with unspeakable trouble, from
general rules, that which is immediately known with the greatest certainty
in the particular case. It is just as if a man were to consult mechanics
as to the motion of his body, and physiology as to his digestion; and
whoever has learnt logic for practical purposes is like him who would
teach a beaver to make its own dam. Logic is, therefore, without practical
utility; but it must nevertheless be retained, because it has
philosophical interest as the special knowledge of the organisation and
action of reason. It is rightly regarded as a definite, self-subsisting,
self-contained, complete, and thoroughly safe discipline; to be treated
scientifically for itself alone and independently of everything else, and
therefore to be studied at the universities. But it has its real value, in
relation to philosophy as a whole, in the inquiry into the nature of
knowledge, and indeed of rational and abstract knowledge. Therefore the
exposition of logic should not have so much the form of a practical
science, should not contain merely naked arbitrary rules for the correct
formation of the judgment, the syllogism, &c., but should rather be
directed to the knowledge of the nature of reason and the concept, and to
the detailed investigation of the principle of sufficient reason of
knowing. For logic is only a paraphrase of this principle, and, more
exactly, only of that exemplification of it in which the ground that gives
truth to the judgment is neither empirical nor metaphysical, but logical
or metalogical. Besides the principle of sufficient reason of knowing, it
is necessary to take account of the three remaining fundamental laws of
thought, or judgments of metalogical truth, so nearly related to it; and
out of these the whole science of reason grows. The nature of thought
proper, that is to say, of the judgment and the syllogism, must be
exhibited in the combination of the spheres of concepts, according to the
analogy of the special schema, in the way shown above; and from all this
the rules of the judgment and the syllogism are to be deduced by
construction. The only practical use we can make of logic is in a debate,
when we can convict our antagonist of his intentional fallacies, rather
than of his actual mistakes, by giving them their technical names. By thus
throwing into the background the practical aim of logic, and bringing out
its connection with the whole scheme of philosophy as one of its chapters,
we do not think that we shall make the study of it less prevalent than it
is just now. For at the present day every one who does not wish to remain
uncultured, and to be numbered with the ignorant and incompetent
multitude, must study speculative philosophy. For the nineteenth century
is a philosophical age, though by this we do not mean either that it has
philosophy, or that philosophy governs it, but rather that it is ripe for
philosophy, and, therefore, stands in need of it. This is a sign of a high
degree of civilisation, and indeed, is a definite stage in the culture of
the ages.(14)

Though logic is of so little practical use, it cannot be denied that it
was invented for practical purposes. It appears to me to have originated
in the following way:—As the love of debating developed among the
Eleatics, the Megarics, and the Sophists, and by degrees became almost a
passion, the confusion in which nearly every debate ended must have made
them feel the necessity of a method of procedure as a guide; and for this
a scientific dialectic had to be sought. The first thing which would have
to be observed would be that both the disputing parties should always be
agreed on some one proposition, to which the disputed points might be
referred. The beginning of the methodical procedure consisted in this,
that the propositions admitted on both sides were formally stated to be
so, and placed at the head of the inquiry. But these propositions were at
first concerned only with the material of the inquiry. It was soon
observed that in the process of going back to the truth admitted on both
sides, and of deducing their assertions from it, each party followed
certain forms and laws about which, without any express agreement, there
was no difference of opinion. And from this it became evident that these
must constitute the peculiar and natural procedure of reason itself, the
form of investigation. Although this was not exposed to any doubt or
difference of opinion, some pedantically systematic philosopher hit upon
the idea that it would look well, and be the completion of the method of
dialectic, if this formal part of all discussion, this regular procedure
of reason itself, were to be expressed in abstract propositions, just like
the substantial propositions admitted on both sides, and placed at the
beginning of every investigation, as the fixed canon of debate to which
reference and appeal must always be made. In this way what had formerly
been followed only by tacit agreement, and instinctively, would be
consciously recognised and formally expressed. By degrees, more or less
perfect expressions were found for the fundamental principles of logic,
such as the principles of contradiction, sufficient reason, excluded
middle, the dictum de omni et nullo, as well as the special rules of the
syllogism, as for example, ex meris particularibus aut negativis nihil
sequitur, a rationato ad rationem non valet consequentia, and so on. That
all this was only brought about slowly, and with great pains, and up till
the time of Aristotle remained very incomplete, is evident from the
awkward and tedious way in which logical truths are brought out in many of
the Platonic dialogues, and still more from what Sextus Empiricus tells us
of the controversies of the Megarics, about the easiest and simplest
logical rules, and the laborious way in which they were brought into a
definite form (Sext. Emp. adv. Math. l. 8, p. 112). But Aristotle
collected, arranged, and corrected all that had been discovered before his
time, and brought it to an incomparably greater state of perfection. If we
thus observe how the course of Greek culture had prepared the way for, and
led up to the work of Aristotle, we shall be little inclined to believe
the assertion of the Persian author, quoted by Sir William Jones with much
approval, that Kallisthenes found a complete system of logic among the
Indians, and sent it to his uncle Aristotle (Asiatic Researches, vol. iv.
p. 163). It is easy to understand that in the dreary middle ages the
Aristotelian logic would be very acceptable to the controversial spirit of
the schoolmen, which, in the absence of all real knowledge, spent its
energy upon mere formulas and words, and that it would be eagerly adopted
even in its mutilated Arabian form, and presently established as the
centre of all knowledge. Though its authority has since declined, yet up
to our own time logic has retained the credit of a self-contained,
practical, and highly important science. Indeed, in our own day, the
Kantian philosophy, the foundation-stone of which is taken from logic, has
excited a new interest in it; which, in this respect, at any rate, that
is, as the means of the knowledge of the nature of reason, it deserves.

Correct and accurate conclusions may be arrived at if we carefully observe
the relation of the spheres of concepts, and only conclude that one sphere
is contained in a third sphere, when we have clearly seen that this first
sphere is contained in a second, which in its turn is contained in the
third. On the other hand, the art of sophistry lies in casting only a
superficial glance at the relations of the spheres of the concepts, and
then manipulating these relations to suit our purposes, generally in the
following way:—When the sphere of an observed concept lies partly within
that of another concept, and partly within a third altogether different
sphere, we treat it as if it lay entirely within the one or the other, as
may suit our purpose. For example, in speaking of passion, we may subsume
it under the concept of the greatest force, the mightiest agency in the
world, or under the concept of the irrational, and this again under the
concept of impotency or weakness. We may then repeat the process, and
start anew with each concept to which the argument leads us. A concept has
almost always several others, which partially come under it, and each of
these contains part of the sphere of the first, but also includes in its
own sphere something more, which is not in the first. But we draw
attention only to that one of these latter concepts, under which we wish
to subsume the first, and let the others remain unobserved, or keep them
concealed. On the possession of this skill depends the whole art of
sophistry and all finer fallacies; for logical fallacies such as
mentiens, velatus, cornatus, &c., are clearly too clumsy for actual
use. I am not aware that hitherto any one has traced the nature of all
sophistry and persuasion back to this last possible ground of its
existence, and referred it to the peculiar character of concepts, i.e.,
to the procedure of reason itself. Therefore, as my exposition has led me
to it, though it is very easily understood, I will illustrate it in the
following table by means of a schema. This table is intended to show how
the spheres of concepts overlap each other at many points, and so leave
room for a passage from each concept to whichever one we please of several
other concepts. I hope, however, that no one will be led by this table to
attach more importance to this little explanation, which I have merely
given in passing, than ought to belong to it, from the nature of the
subject. I have chosen as an illustration the concept of travelling. Its
sphere partially includes four others, to any of which the sophist may
pass at will; these again partly include other spheres, several of them
two or more at once, and through these the sophist takes whichever way he
chooses, always as if it were the only way, till at last he reaches, in
good or evil, whatever end he may have in view. In passing from one sphere
to another, it is only necessary always to follow the direction from the
centre (the given chief concept) to the circumference, and never to
reverse this process. Such a piece of sophistry may be either an unbroken
speech, or it may assume the strict syllogistic form, according to what is
the weak side of the hearer. Most scientific arguments, and especially
philosophical demonstrations, are at bottom not much more than this, for
how else would it be possible, that so much, in different ages, has not
only been falsely apprehended (for error itself has a different source),
but demonstrated and proved, and has yet afterwards been found to be
fundamentally wrong, for example, the Leibnitz-Wolfian Philosophy,
Ptolemaic Astronomy, Stahl’s Chemistry, Newton’s Theory of Colours, &c.
&c.(15)

§ 10. Through all this, the question presses ever more upon us, how
certainty is to be attained, how judgments  are to be established,
what constitutes rational knowledge, (wissen), and science, which we
rank with language and deliberate action as the third great benefit
conferred by reason.

Reason is feminine in nature; it can only give after it has received. Of
itself it has nothing but the empty forms of its operation. There is no
absolutely pure rational knowledge except the four principles to which I
have attributed metalogical truth; the principles of identity,
contradiction, excluded middle, and sufficient reason of knowledge. For
even the rest of logic is not absolutely pure rational knowledge. It
presupposes the relations and the combinations of the spheres of concepts.
But concepts in general only exist after experience of ideas of
perception, and as their whole nature consists in their relation to these,
it is clear that they presuppose them. No special content, however, is
presupposed, but merely the existence of a content generally, and so logic
as a whole may fairly pass for pure rational science. In all other
sciences reason has received its content from ideas of perception; in
mathematics from the relations of space and time, presented in intuition
or perception prior to all experience; in pure natural science, that is,
in what we know of the course of nature prior to any experience, the
content of the science proceeds from the pure understanding, i.e., from
the a priori knowledge of the law of causality and its connection with
those pure intuitions or perceptions of space and time. In all other
sciences everything that is not derived from the sources we have just
referred to belongs to experience. Speaking generally, to know
rationally (wissen) means to have in the power of the mind, and capable
of being reproduced at will, such judgments as have their sufficient
ground of knowledge in something outside themselves, i.e., are true.
Thus only abstract cognition is rational knowledge (wissen), which is
therefore the result of reason, so that we cannot accurately say of the
lower animals that they rationally  know (wissen) anything, although
they have apprehension of what is presented in perception, and memory of
this, and consequently imagination, which is further proved by the
circumstance that they dream. We attribute consciousness to them, and
therefore although the word (bewusstsein) is derived from the verb to
know rationally (wissen), the conception of consciousness corresponds
generally with that of idea of whatever kind it may be. Thus we attribute
life to plants, but not consciousness. Rational knowledge (wissen) is
therefore abstract consciousness, the permanent possession in concepts of
the reason, of what has become known in another way.

§ 11. In this regard the direct opposite of rational knowledge is
feeling, and therefore we must insert the explanation of feeling here. The
concept which the word feeling denotes has merely a negative content,
which is this, that something which is present in consciousness, is not a
concept, is not abstract rational knowledge. Except this, whatever it
may be, it comes under the concept of feeling. Thus the immeasurably
wide sphere of the concept of feeling includes the most different kinds of
objects, and no one can ever understand how they come together until he
has recognised that they all agree in this negative respect, that they are
not abstract concepts. For the most diverse and even antagonistic
elements lie quietly side by side in this concept; for example, religious
feeling, feeling of sensual pleasure, moral feeling, bodily feeling, as
touch, pain, sense of colour, of sounds and their harmonies and discords,
feeling of hate, of disgust, of self-satisfaction, of honour, of disgrace,
of right, of wrong, sense of truth, æsthetic feeling, feeling of power,
weakness, health, friendship, love, &c. &c. There is absolutely nothing in
common among them except the negative quality that they are not abstract
rational knowledge. But this diversity becomes more striking when the
apprehension of space relations presented a priori in perception, and
also the knowledge of the pure understanding is brought under this
concept, and when we say of all knowledge and all truth, of which we are
first conscious only intuitively, and have not yet formulated in abstract
concepts, we feel it. I should like, for the sake of illustration, to
give some examples of this taken from recent books, as they are striking
proofs of my theory. I remember reading in the introduction to a German
translation of Euclid, that we ought to make beginners in geometry draw
the figures before proceeding to demonstrate, for in this way they would
already feel geometrical truth before the demonstration brought them
complete knowledge. In the same way Schleiermacher speaks in his “Critique
of Ethics” of logical and mathematical feeling (p. 339), and also of the
feeling of the sameness or difference of two formulas (p. 342). Again
Tennemann in his “History of Philosophy” (vol. I., p. 361) says, “One
felt that the fallacies were not right, but could not point out the
mistakes.” Now, so long as we do not regard this concept “feeling” from
the right point of view, and do not recognise that one negative
characteristic which alone is essential to it, it must constantly give
occasion for misunderstanding and controversy, on account of the excessive
wideness of its sphere, and its entirely negative and very limited content
which is determined in a purely one-sided manner. Since then we have in
German the nearly synonymous word empfindung (sensation), it would be
convenient to make use of it for bodily feeling, as a sub-species. This
concept “feeling,” which is quite out of proportion to all others,
doubtless originated in the following manner. All concepts, and concepts
alone, are denoted by words; they exist only for the reason, and proceed
from it. With concepts, therefore, we are already at a one-sided point of
view; but from such a point of view what is near appears distinct and is
set down as positive, what is farther off becomes mixed up and is soon
regarded as merely negative. Thus each nation calls all others foreign: to
the Greek all others are barbarians; to the Englishman all that is not
England or English is continent or continental; to the believer all others
are heretics, or heathens; to the noble all others are roturiers; to the
student all others are Philistines, and so forth. Now, reason itself,
strange as it may seem, is guilty of the same one-sidedness, indeed one
might say of the same crude ignorance arising from vanity, for it classes
under the one concept, “feeling,” every modification of consciousness
which does not immediately belong to its own mode of apprehension, that is
to say, which is not an abstract concept. It has had to pay the penalty
of this hitherto in misunderstanding and confusion in its own province,
because its own procedure had not become clear to it through thorough
self-knowledge, for a special faculty of feeling has been set up, and new
theories of it are constructed.

§ 12. Rational knowledge (wissen) is then all abstract knowledge,—that
is, the knowledge which is peculiar to the reason as distinguished from
the understanding. Its contradictory opposite has just been explained to
be the concept “feeling.” Now, as reason only reproduces, for knowledge,
what has been received in another way, it does not actually extend our
knowledge, but only gives it another form. It enables us to know in the
abstract and generally, what first became known in sense-perception, in
the concrete. But this is much more important than it appears at first
sight when so expressed. For it depends entirely upon the fact that
knowledge has become rational or abstract knowledge (wissen), that it
can be safely preserved, that it is communicable and susceptible of
certain and wide-reaching application to practice. Knowledge in the form
of sense-perception is valid only of the particular case, extends only to
what is nearest, and ends with it, for sensibility and understanding can
only comprehend one object at a time. Every enduring, arranged, and
planned activity must therefore proceed from principles,—that is, from
abstract knowledge, and it must be conducted in accordance with them.
Thus, for example, the knowledge of the relation of cause and effect
arrived at by the understanding, is in itself far completer, deeper and
more exhaustive than anything that can be thought about it in the
abstract; the understanding alone knows in perception directly and
completely the nature of the effect of a lever, of a pulley, or a
cog-wheel, the stability of an arch, and so forth. But on account of the
peculiarity of the knowledge of perception just referred to, that it only
extends to what is immediately present, the mere understanding can never
enable us to construct machines and buildings. Here reason must come in;
it must substitute abstract concepts for ideas of perception, and take
them as the guide of action; and if they are right, the anticipated result
will happen. In the same way we have perfect knowledge in pure perception
of the nature and constitution of the parabola, hyperbola, and spiral; but
if we are to make trustworthy application of this knowledge to the real,
it must first become abstract knowledge, and by this it certainly loses
its character of intuition or perception, but on the other hand it gains
the certainty and preciseness of abstract knowledge. The differential
calculus does not really extend our knowledge of the curve, it contains
nothing that was not already in the mere pure perception of the curve; but
it alters the kind of knowledge, it changes the intuitive into an abstract
knowledge, which is so valuable for application. But here we must refer to
another peculiarity of our faculty of knowledge, which could not be
observed until the distinction between the knowledge of the senses and
understanding and abstract knowledge had been made quite clear. It is
this, that relations of space cannot as such be directly translated into
abstract knowledge, but only temporal quantities,—that is, numbers, are
suitable for this. Numbers alone can be expressed in abstract concepts
which accurately correspond to them, not spacial quantities. The concept
“thousand” is just as different from the concept “ten,” as both these
temporal quantities are in perception. We think of a thousand as a
distinct multiple of ten, into which we can resolve it at pleasure for
perception in time,—that is to say, we can count it. But between the
abstract concept of a mile and that of a foot, apart from any concrete
perception of either, and without the help of number, there is no accurate
distinction corresponding to the quantities themselves. In both we only
think of a spacial quantity in general, and if they must be completely
distinguished we are compelled either to call in the assistance of
intuition or perception in space, which would be a departure from abstract
knowledge, or we must think the difference in numbers. If then we wish
to have abstract knowledge of space-relations we must first translate them
into time-relations,—that is, into numbers; therefore only arithmetic, and
not geometry, is the universal science of quantity, and geometry must be
translated into arithmetic if it is to be communicable, accurately precise
and applicable in practice. It is true that a space-relation as such may
also be thought in the abstract; for example, “the sine increases as the
angle,” but if the quantity of this relation is to be given, it requires
number for its expression. This necessity, that if we wish to have
abstract knowledge of space-relations (i.e., rational knowledge, not
mere intuition or perception), space with its three dimensions must be
translated into time which has only one dimension, this necessity it is,
which makes mathematics so difficult. This becomes very clear if we
compare the perception of curves with their analytical calculation, or the
table of logarithms of the trigonometrical functions with the perception
of the changing relations of the parts of a triangle, which are expressed
by them. What vast mazes of figures, what laborious calculations it would
require to express in the abstract what perception here apprehends at a
glance completely and with perfect accuracy, namely, how the co-sine
diminishes as the sine increases, how the co-sine of one angle is the sine
of another, the inverse relation of the increase and decrease of the two
angles, and so forth. How time, we might say, must complain, that with its
one dimension it should be compelled to express the three dimensions of
space! Yet this is necessary if we wish to possess, for application, an
expression, in abstract concepts, of space-relations. They could not be
translated directly into abstract concepts, but only through the medium of
the pure temporal quantity, number, which alone is directly related to
abstract knowledge. Yet it is worthy of remark, that as space adapts
itself so well to perception, and by means of its three dimensions, even
its complicated relations are easily apprehended, while it eludes the
grasp of abstract knowledge; time, on the contrary, passes easily into
abstract knowledge, but gives very little to perception. Our perceptions
of numbers in their proper element, mere time, without the help of space,
scarcely extends as far as ten, and beyond that we have only abstract
concepts of numbers, no knowledge of them which can be presented in
perception. On the other hand, we connect with every numeral, and with all
algebraical symbols, accurately defined abstract concepts.

We may further remark here that some minds only find full satisfaction in
what is known through perception. What they seek is the reason and
consequent of being in space, sensuously expressed; a demonstration after
the manner of Euclid, or an arithmetical solution of spacial problems,
does not please them. Other minds, on the contrary, seek merely the
abstract concepts which are needful for applying and communicating
knowledge. They have patience and memory for abstract principles,
formulas, demonstrations in long trains of reasoning, and calculations, in
which the symbols represent the most complicated abstractions. The latter
seek preciseness, the former sensible perception. The difference is
characteristic.

The greatest value of rational or abstract knowledge is that it can be
communicated and permanently retained. It is principally on this account
that it is so inestimably important for practice. Any one may have a
direct perceptive knowledge through the understanding alone, of the causal
connection, of the changes and motions of natural bodies, and he may find
entire satisfaction in it; but he cannot communicate this knowledge to
others until it has been made permanent for thought in concepts. Knowledge
of the first kind is even sufficient for practice, if a man puts his
knowledge into practice himself, in an action which can be accomplished
while the perception is still vivid; but it is not sufficient if the help
of others is required, or even if the action is his own but must be
carried out at different times, and therefore requires a pre-conceived
plan. Thus, for example, a practised billiard-player may have a perfect
knowledge of the laws of the impact of elastic bodies upon each other,
merely in the understanding, merely for direct perception; and for him it
is quite sufficient; but on the other hand it is only the man who has
studied the science of mechanics, who has, properly speaking, a rational
knowledge of these laws, that is, a knowledge of them in the abstract.
Such knowledge of the understanding in perception is sufficient even for
the construction of machines, when the inventor of the machine executes
the work himself; as we often see in the case of talented workmen, who
have no scientific knowledge. But whenever a number of men, and their
united action taking place at different times, is required for the
completion of a mechanical work, of a machine, or a building, then he who
conducts it must have thought out the plan in the abstract, and such
co-operative activity is only possible through the assistance of reason.
It is, however, remarkable that in the first kind of activity, in which we
have supposed that one man alone, in an uninterrupted course of action,
accomplishes something, abstract knowledge, the application of reason or
reflection, may often be a hindrance to him; for example, in the case of
billiard-playing, of fighting, of tuning an instrument, or in the case of
singing. Here perceptive knowledge must directly guide action; its passage
through reflection makes it uncertain, for it divides the attention and
confuses the man. Thus savages and untaught men, who are little accustomed
to think, perform certain physical exercises, fight with beasts, shoot
with bows and arrows and the like, with a certainty and rapidity which the
reflecting European never attains to, just because his deliberation makes
him hesitate and delay. For he tries, for example, to hit the right
position or the right point of time, by finding out the mean between two
false extremes; while the savage hits it directly without thinking of the
false courses open to him. In the same way it is of no use to me to know
in the abstract the exact angle, in degrees and minutes, at which I must
apply a razor, if I do not know it intuitively, that is, if I have not got
it in my touch. The knowledge of physiognomy also, is interfered with by
the application of reason. This knowledge must be gained directly through
the understanding. We say that the expression, the meaning of the
features, can only be felt, that is, it cannot be put into abstract
concepts. Every man has his direct intuitive method of physiognomy and
pathognomy, yet one man understands more clearly than another these
signatura rerum. But an abstract science of physiognomy to be taught and
learned is not possible; for the distinctions of difference are here so
fine that concepts cannot reach them; therefore abstract knowledge is
related to them as a mosaic is to a painting by a Van der Werft or a
Denner. In mosaics, however fine they may be, the limits of the stones are
always there, and therefore no continuous passage from one colour to
another is possible, and this is also the case with regard to concepts,
with their rigidity and sharp delineation; however finely we may divide
them by exact definition, they are still incapable of reaching the finer
modifications of the perceptible, and this is just what happens in the
example we have taken, knowledge of physiognomy.(16)

This quality of concepts by which they resemble the stones of a mosaic,
and on account of which perception always remains their asymptote, is also
the reason why nothing good is produced in art by their means. If the
singer or the virtuoso attempts to guide his execution by reflection he
remains silent. And this is equally true of the composer, the painter, and
the poet. The concept always remains unfruitful in art; it can only direct
the technical part of it, its sphere is science. We shall consider more
fully in the third book, why all true art proceeds from sensuous
knowledge, never from the concept. Indeed, with regard to behaviour also,
and personal agreeableness in society, the concept has only a negative
value in restraining the grosser manifestations of egotism and brutality;
so that a polished manner is its commendable production. But all that is
attractive, gracious, charming in behaviour, all affectionateness and
friendliness, must not proceed from the concepts, for if it does, “we feel
intention, and are put out of tune.” All dissimulation is the work of
reflection; but it cannot be maintained constantly and without
interruption: “nemo  potest personam diu ferre fictum,” says Seneca in
his book de clementia; and so it is generally found out and loses its
effect. Reason is needed in the full stress of life, where quick
conclusions, bold action, rapid and sure comprehension are required, but
it may easily spoil all if it gains the upper hand, and by perplexing
hinders the intuitive, direct discovery, and grasp of the right by simple
understanding, and thus induces irresolution.

Lastly, virtue and holiness do not proceed from reflection, but from the
inner depths of the will, and its relation to knowledge. The exposition of
this belongs to another part of our work; this, however, I may remark
here, that the dogmas relating to ethics may be the same in the reason of
whole nations, but the action of every individual different; and the
converse also holds good; action, we say, is guided by feelings,—that
is, simply not by concepts, but as a matter of fact by the ethical
character. Dogmas occupy the idle reason; but action in the end pursues
its own course independently of them, generally not according to abstract
rules, but according to unspoken maxims, the expression of which is the
whole man himself. Therefore, however different the religious dogmas of
nations may be, yet in the case of all of them, a good action is
accompanied by unspeakable satisfaction, and a bad action by endless
remorse. No mockery can shake the former; no priest’s absolution can
deliver from the latter. Notwithstanding this, we must allow, that for the
pursuit of a virtuous life, the application of reason is needful; only it
is not its source, but has the subordinate function of preserving
resolutions which have been made, of providing maxims to withstand the
weakness of the moment, and give consistency to action. It plays the same
part ultimately in art also, where it has just as little to do with the
essential matter, but assists in carrying it out, for genius is not always
at call, and yet the work must be completed in all its parts and rounded
off to a whole.(17)

§ 13. All these discussions of the advantages and disadvantages of the
application of reason are intended to show, that although abstract
rational knowledge is the reflex of ideas of perception, and is founded on
them, it is by no means in such entire congruity with them that it could
everywhere take their place: indeed it never corresponds to them quite
accurately. And thus, as we have seen, many human actions can only be
performed by the help of reason and deliberation, and yet there are some
which are better performed without its assistance. This very incongruity
of sensuous and abstract knowledge, on account of which the latter always
merely approximates to the former, as mosaic approximates to painting, is
the cause of a very remarkable phenomenon which, like reason itself, is
peculiar to human nature, and of which the explanations that have ever
anew been attempted, are insufficient: I mean laughter. On account of
the source of this phenomenon, we cannot avoid giving the explanation of
it here, though it again interrupts the course of our work to do so. The
cause of laughter in every case is simply the sudden perception of the
incongruity between a concept and the real objects which have been thought
through it in some relation, and laughter itself is just the expression of
this incongruity. It often occurs in this way: two or more real objects
are thought through one concept, and the identity of the concept is
transferred to the objects; it then becomes strikingly apparent from the
entire difference of the objects in other respects, that the concept was
only applicable to them from a one-sided point of view. It occurs just as
often, however, that the incongruity between a single real object and the
concept under which, from one point of view, it has rightly been subsumed,
is suddenly felt. Now the more correct the subsumption of such objects
under a concept may be from one point of view, and the greater and more
glaring their incongruity with it, from another point of view, the greater
is the ludicrous effect which is produced by this contrast. All laughter
then is occasioned by a paradox, and therefore by unexpected subsumption,
whether this is expressed in words or in actions. This, briefly stated, is
the true explanation of the ludicrous.

I shall not pause here to relate anecdotes as examples to illustrate my
theory; for it is so simple and comprehensible that it does not require
them, and everything ludicrous which the reader may remember is equally
valuable as a proof of it. But the theory is confirmed and illustrated by
distinguishing two species into which the ludicrous is divided, and which
result from the theory. Either, we have previously known two or more very
different real objects, ideas of sense-perception, and have intentionally
identified them through the unity of a concept which comprehends them
both; this species of the ludicrous is called wit. Or, conversely, the
concept is first present in knowledge, and we pass from it to reality, and
to operation upon it, to action: objects which in other respects are
fundamentally different, but which are all thought in that one concept,
are now regarded and treated in the same way, till, to the surprise and
astonishment of the person acting, the great difference of their other
aspects appears: this species of the ludicrous is called folly.
Therefore everything ludicrous is either a flash of wit or a foolish
action, according as the procedure has been from the discrepancy of the
objects to the identity of the concept, or the converse; the former always
intentional, the latter always unintentional, and from without. To seem to
reverse the starting-point, and to conceal wit with the mask of folly, is
the art of the jester and the clown. Being quite aware of the diversity of
the objects, the jester unites them, with secret wit, under one concept,
and then starting from this concept he receives from the subsequently
discovered diversity of the objects the surprise which he himself
prepared. It follows from this short but sufficient theory of the
ludicrous, that, if we set aside the last case, that of the jester, wit
must always show itself in words, folly generally in actions, though also
in words, when it only expresses an intention and does not actually carry
it out, or when it shows itself merely in judgments and opinions.

Pedantry is a form of folly. It arises in this way: a man lacks
confidence in his own understanding, and, therefore, does not wish to
trust to it, to recognise what is right directly in the particular case.
He, therefore, puts it entirely under the control of the reason, and seeks
to be guided by reason in everything; that is to say, he tries always to
proceed from general concepts, rules, and maxims, and to confine himself
strictly to them in life, in art, and even in moral conduct. Hence that
clinging to the form, to the manner, to the expression and word which is
characteristic of pedantry, and which with it takes the place of the real
nature of the matter. The incongruity then between the concept and reality
soon shows itself here, and it becomes evident that the former never
condescends to the particular case, and that with its generality and rigid
definiteness it can never accurately apply to the fine distinctions of
difference and innumerable modifications of the actual. Therefore, the
pedant, with his general maxims, almost always misses the mark in life,
shows himself to be foolish, awkward, useless. In art, in which the
concept is unfruitful, he produces lifeless, stiff, abortive mannerisms.
Even with regard to ethics, the purpose to act rightly or nobly cannot
always be carried out in accordance with abstract maxims; for in many
cases the excessively nice distinctions in the nature of the circumstances
necessitate a choice of the right proceeding directly from the character;
for the application of mere abstract maxims sometimes gives false results,
because the maxims only half apply; and sometimes cannot be carried out,
because they are foreign to the individual character of the actor, and
this never allows itself to be entirely discovered; therefore,
inconsistencies arise. Since then Kant makes it a condition of the moral
worth of an action, that it shall proceed from pure rational abstract
maxims, without any inclination or momentary emotion, we cannot entirely
absolve him from the reproach of encouraging moral pedantry. This reproach
is the significance of Schiller’s epigram, entitled “Scruples of
Conscience.” When we speak, especially in connection with politics, of
doctrinaires, theorists, savants, and so forth, we mean pedants, that is,
persons who know the things well in the abstract, but not in the concrete.
Abstraction consists in thinking away the less general predicates; but it
is precisely upon these that so much depends in practice.

To complete our theory it remains for us to mention a spurious kind of
wit, the play upon words, the calembourg, the pun, to which may be added
the equivocation, the double entendre, the chief use of which is the
expression of what is obscene. Just as the witticism brings two very
different real objects under one concept, the pun brings two different
concepts, by the assistance of accident, under one word. The same contrast
appears, only familiar and more superficial, because it does not spring
from the nature of things, but merely from the accident of nomenclature.
In the case of the witticism the identity is in the concept, the
difference in the reality, but in the case of the pun the difference is in
the concepts and the identity in the reality, for the terminology is here
the reality. It would only be a somewhat far-fetched comparison if we were
to say that the pun is related to the witticism as the parabola (sic) of
the upper inverted cone to that of the lower. The misunderstanding of the
word or the quid pro quo is the unintentional pun, and is related to it
exactly as folly is to wit. Thus the deaf man often affords occasion for
laughter, just as much as the fool, and inferior writers of comedy often
use the former for the latter to raise a laugh.

I have treated laughter here only from the psychical side; with regard to
the physical side, I refer to what is said on the subject in the
“Parerga,” vol. II. ch. vi., § 98.(18)

§ 14. By means of these various discussions it is hoped that both the
difference and the relation between the process of knowledge that belongs
to the reason, rational knowledge, the concept on the one hand, and the
direct knowledge in purely sensuous, mathematical intuition or perception,
and apprehension by the understanding on the other hand, has been clearly
brought out. This remarkable relation of our kinds of knowledge led us
almost inevitably to give, in passing, explanations of feeling and of
laughter, but from all this we now turn back to the further consideration
of science as the third great benefit which reason confers on man, the
other two being speech and deliberate action. The general discussion of
science which now devolves upon us, will be concerned partly with its
form, partly with the foundation of its judgments, and lastly with its
content.

We have seen that, with the exception of the basis of pure logic, rational
knowledge in general has not its source in the reason itself; but having
been otherwise obtained as knowledge of perception, it is stored up in the
reason, for through reason it has entirely changed its character, and has
become abstract knowledge. All rational knowledge, that is, knowledge that
has been raised to consciousness in the abstract, is related to science
strictly so called, as a fragment to the whole. Every one has gained a
rational knowledge of many different things through experience, through
consideration of the individual objects presented to him, but only he who
sets himself the task of acquiring a complete knowledge in the abstract of
a particular class of objects, strives after science. This class can only
be marked off by means of a concept; therefore, at the beginning of every
science there stands a concept, and by means of it the class of objects
concerning which this science promises a complete knowledge in the
abstract, is separated in thought from the whole world of things. For
example, the concept of space-relations, or of the action of unorganised
bodies upon each other, or of the nature of plants, or of animals, or of
the successive changes of the surface of the globe, or of the changes of
the human race as a whole, or of the construction of a language, and so
forth. If science sought to obtain the knowledge of its object, by
investigating each individual thing that is thought through the concept,
till by degrees it had learned the whole, no human memory would be equal
to the task, and no certainty of completeness would be obtainable.
Therefore, it makes use of that property of concept-spheres explained
above, that they include each other, and it concerns itself mainly with
the wider spheres which lie within the concept of its object in general.
When the relations of these spheres to each other have been determined,
all that is thought in them is also generally determined, and can now be
more and more accurately determined by the separation of smaller and
smaller concept-spheres. In this way it is possible for a science to
comprehend its object completely. This path which it follows to knowledge,
the path from the general to the particular, distinguishes it from
ordinary rational knowledge; therefore, systematic form is an essential
and characteristic feature of science. The combination of the most general
concept-spheres of every science, that is, the knowledge of its first
principles, is the indispensable condition of mastering it; how far we
advance from these to the more special propositions is a matter of choice,
and does not increase the thoroughness but only the extent of our
knowledge of the science. The number of the first principles to which all
the rest are subordinated, varies greatly in the different sciences, so
that in some there is more subordination, in others more co-ordination;
and in this respect, the former make greater claims upon the judgment, the
latter upon the memory. It was known to the schoolmen,(19) that, as the
syllogism requires two premises, no science can proceed from a single
first principle which cannot be the subject of further deduction, but must
have several, at least two. The specially classifying sciences: Zoology,
Botany, and also Physics and Chemistry, inasmuch as they refer all
inorganic action to a few fundamental forces, have most subordination;
history, on the other hand, has really none at all; for the general in it
consists merely in the survey of the principal periods, from which,
however, the particular events cannot be deduced, and are only
subordinated to them according to time, but according to the concept are
co-ordinate with them. Therefore, history, strictly speaking, is certainly
rational knowledge, but is not science. In mathematics, according to
Euclid’s treatment, the axioms alone are indemonstrable first principles,
and all demonstrations are in gradation strictly subordinated to them. But
this method of treatment is not essential to mathematics, and in fact each
proposition introduces quite a new space construction, which in itself is
independent of those which precede it, and indeed can be completely
comprehended from itself, quite independently of them, in the pure
intuition or perception of space, in which the most complicated
construction is just as directly evident as the axiom; but of this more
fully hereafter. Meanwhile every mathematical proposition remains always a
universal truth, which is valid for innumerable particular cases; and a
graduated process from the simple to the complicated propositions which
are to be deduced from them, is also essential to mathematics; therefore,
in every respect mathematics is a science. The completeness of a science
as such, that is, in respect of form, consists in there being as much
subordination and as little co-ordination of the principles as possible.
Scientific talent in general is, therefore, the faculty of subordinating
the concept-spheres according to their different determinations, so that,
as Plato repeatedly counsels, a science shall not be constituted by a
general concept and an indefinite multiplicity immediately under it, but
that knowledge shall descend by degrees from the general to the
particular, through intermediate concepts and divisions, according to
closer and closer definitions. In Kantian language this is called
satisfying equally the law of homogeneity and that of specification. It
arises from this peculiar nature of scientific completeness, that the aim
of science is not greater certainty—for certainty may be possessed in just
as high a degree by the most disconnected particular knowledge—but its aim
is rather the facilitating of rational knowledge by means of its form, and
the possibility of the completeness of rational knowledge which this form
affords. It is therefore a very prevalent but perverted opinion that the
scientific character of knowledge consists in its greater certainty, and
just as false is the conclusion following from this, that, strictly
speaking, the only sciences are mathematics and logic, because only in
them, on account of their purely a priori character, is there
unassailable certainty of knowledge. This advantage cannot be denied them,
but it gives them no special claim to be regarded as sciences; for the
special characteristic of science does not lie in certainty but in the
systematic form of knowledge, based on the gradual descent from the
general to the particular. The process of knowledge from the general to
the particular, which is peculiar to the sciences, involves the necessity
that in the sciences much should be established by deduction from
preceding propositions, that is to say, by demonstration; and this has
given rise to the old mistake that only what has been demonstrated is
absolutely true, and that every truth requires a demonstration; whereas,
on the contrary, every demonstration requires an undemonstrated truth,
which ultimately supports it, or it may be, its own demonstration.
Therefore a directly established truth is as much to be preferred to a
truth established by demonstration as water from the spring is to water
from the aqueduct. Perception, partly pure a priori, as it forms the
basis of mathematics, partly empirical a posteriori, as it forms the
basis of all the other sciences, is the source of all truth and the
foundation of all science. (Logic alone is to be excepted, which is not
founded upon perception but yet upon direct knowledge by the reason of
its own laws.) Not the demonstrated judgments nor their demonstrations,
but judgments which are created directly out of perception, and founded
upon it rather than on any demonstrations, are to science what the sun is
to the world; for all light proceeds from them, and lighted by their light
the others give light also. To establish the truth of such primary
judgments directly from perception, to raise such strongholds of science
from the innumerable multitude of real objects, that is the work of the
faculty of judgment, which consists in the power of rightly and
accurately carrying over into abstract consciousness what is known in
perception, and judgment is consequently the mediator between
understanding and reason. Only extraordinary and exceptional strength of
judgment in the individual can actually advance science; but every one who
is possessed of a healthy reason is able to deduce propositions from
propositions, to demonstrate, to draw conclusions. To lay down and make
permanent for reflection, in suitable concepts, what is known through
perception, so that, on the one hand, what is common to many real objects
is thought through one concept, and, on the other hand, their points of
difference are each thought through one concept, so that the different
shall be known and thought as different in spite of a partial agreement,
and the identical shall be known and thought as identical in spite of a
partial difference, all in accordance with the end and intention which in
each case is in view; all this is done by the faculty of judgment.
Deficiency in judgment is silliness. The silly man fails to grasp, now
the partial or relative difference of concepts which in one aspect are
identical, now the identity of concepts which are relatively or partially
different. To this explanation of the faculty of judgment, moreover,
Kant’s division of it into reflecting and subsuming judgment may be
applied, according as it passes from the perceived objects to the
concepts, or from the latter to the former; in both cases always mediating
between empirical knowledge of the understanding and the reflective
knowledge of the reason. There can be no truth which could be brought out
by means of syllogisms alone; and the necessity of establishing truth by
means of syllogisms is merely relative, indeed subjective. Since all
demonstration is syllogistic, in the case of a new truth we must first
seek, not for a demonstration, but for direct evidence, and only in the
absence of such evidence is a demonstration to be temporarily made use of.
No science is susceptible of demonstration throughout any more than a
building can stand in the air; all its demonstrations must ultimately rest
upon what is perceived, and consequently cannot be demonstrated, for the
whole world of reflection rests upon and is rooted in the world of
perception. All primal, that is, original, evidence is a perception,
as the word itself indicates. Therefore it is either empirical or founded
upon the perception a priori of the conditions of possible experience.
In both cases it affords only immanent, not transcendent knowledge. Every
concept has its worth and its existence only in its relation, sometimes
very indirect, to an idea of perception; what is true of the concepts is
also true of the judgments constructed out of them, and of all science.
Therefore it must in some way be possible to know directly without
demonstrations or syllogisms every truth that is arrived at through
syllogisms and communicated by demonstrations. This is most difficult in
the case of certain complicated mathematical propositions at which we only
arrive by chains of syllogisms; for example, the calculation of the chords
and tangents to all arcs by deduction from the proposition of Pythagoras.
But even such a truth as this cannot essentially and solely rest upon
abstract principles, and the space-relations which lie at its foundation
also must be capable of being so presented a priori in pure intuition or
perception that the truth of their abstract expression is directly
established. But of mathematical demonstration we shall speak more fully
shortly.

It is true we often hear men speak in a lofty strain of sciences which
rest entirely upon correct conclusions drawn from sure premises, and which
are consequently unassailable. But through pure logical reasoning, however
true the premises may be, we shall never receive more than an articulate
expression and exposition of what lies already complete in the premises;
thus we shall only explicitly expound what was already implicitly
understood. The esteemed sciences referred to are, however, specially the
mathematical sciences, particularly astronomy. But the certainty of
astronomy arises from the fact that it has for its basis the intuition or
perception of space, which is given a priori, and is therefore
infallible. All space-relations, however, follow from each other with a
necessity (ground of being) which affords a priori certainty, and they
can therefore be safely deduced from each other. To these mathematical
properties we have only to add one force of nature, gravity, which acts
precisely in relation to the masses and the square of the distance; and,
lastly, the law of inertia, which follows from the law of causality and is
therefore true a priori, and with it the empirical datum of the motion
impressed, once for all, upon each of these masses. This is the whole
material of astronomy, which both by its simplicity and its certainty
leads to definite results, which are highly interesting on account of the
vastness and importance of the objects. For example, if I know the mass of
a planet and the distance of its satellite from it, I can tell with
certainty the period of the revolution of the latter according to Kepler’s
second law. But the ground of this law is, that with this distance only
this velocity will both chain the satellite to the planet and prevent it
from falling into it. Thus it is only upon such a geometrical basis, that
is, by means of an intuition or perception a priori, and also under the
application of a law of nature, that much can be arrived at by means of
syllogisms, for here they are merely like bridges from one sensuous
apprehension to others; but it is not so with mere pure syllogistic
reasoning in the exclusively logical method. The source of the first
fundamental truths of astronomy is, however, properly induction, that is,
the comprehension of what is given in many perceptions in one true and
directly founded judgment. From this, hypotheses are afterwards
constructed, and their confirmation by experience, as induction
approaching to completeness, affords the proof of the first judgment. For
example, the apparent motion of the planets is known empirically; after
many false hypotheses with regard to the spacial connection of this motion
(planetary course) the right one was at last found, then the laws which it
obeyed (the laws of Kepler), and, lastly, the cause of these laws
(universal gravitation), and the empirically known agreement of all
observed cases with the whole of the hypotheses, and with their
consequences, that is to say, induction, established them with complete
certainty. The invention of the hypotheses was the work of the judgment,
which rightly comprehended the given facts and expressed them accordingly;
but induction, that is, a multitude of perceptions, confirmed their truth.
But their truth could also be known directly, and by a single empirical
perception, if we could pass freely through space and had telescopic eyes.
Therefore, here also syllogisms are not the essential and only source of
knowledge, but really only a makeshift.

As a third example taken from a different sphere we may mention that the
so-called metaphysical truths, that is, such truths as those to which Kant
assigns the position of the metaphysical first principles of natural
science, do not owe their evidence to demonstration. What is a priori
certain we know directly; as the form of all knowledge, it is known to us
with the most complete necessity. For example, that matter is permanent,
that is, can neither come into being nor pass away, we know directly as
negative truth; for our pure intuition or perception of space and time
gives the possibility of motion; in the law of causality the understanding
affords us the possibility of change of form and quality, but we lack
powers of the imagination for conceiving the coming into being or passing
away of matter. Therefore that truth has at all times been evident to all
men everywhere, nor has it ever been seriously doubted; and this could not
be the case if it had no other ground of knowledge than the abstruse and
exceedingly subtle proof of Kant. But besides this, I have found Kant’s
proof to be false (as is explained in the Appendix), and have shown above
that the permanence of matter is to be deduced, not from the share which
time has in the possibility of experience, but from the share which
belongs to space. The true foundation of all truths which in this sense
are called metaphysical, that is, abstract expressions of the necessary
and universal forms of knowledge, cannot itself lie in abstract
principles; but only in the immediate consciousness of the forms of the
idea communicating itself in apodictic assertions a priori, and fearing
no refutation. But if we yet desire to give a proof of them, it can only
consist in showing that what is to be proved is contained in some truth
about which there is no doubt, either as a part of it or as a
presupposition. Thus, for example, I have shown that all empirical
perception implies the application of the law of causality, the knowledge
of which is hence a condition of all experience, and therefore cannot be
first given and conditioned through experience as Hume thought.
Demonstrations in general are not so much for those who wish to learn as
for those who wish to dispute. Such persons stubbornly deny directly
established insight; now only the truth can be consistent in all
directions, and therefore we must show such persons that they admit under
one form and indirectly, what they deny under another form and directly;
that is, the logically necessary connection between what is denied and
what is admitted.

It is also a consequence of the scientific form, the subordination of
everything particular under a general, and so on always to what is more
general, that the truth of many propositions is only logically
proved,—that is, through their dependence upon other propositions, through
syllogisms, which at the same time appear as proofs. But we must never
forget that this whole form of science is merely a means of rendering
knowledge more easy, not a means to greater certainty. It is easier to
discover the nature of an animal, by means of the species to which it
belongs, and so on through the genus, family, order, and class, than to
examine on every occasion the animal presented to us: but the truth of all
propositions arrived at syllogistically is always conditioned by and
ultimately dependent upon some truth which rests not upon reasoning but
upon perception. If this perception were always as much within our reach
as a deduction through syllogisms, then it would be in every respect
preferable. For every deduction from concepts is exposed to great danger
of error, on account of the fact we have considered above, that so many
spheres lie partly within each other, and that their content is often
vague or uncertain. This is illustrated by a multitude of demonstrations
of false doctrines and sophisms of every kind. Syllogisms are indeed
perfectly certain as regards form, but they are very uncertain on account
of their matter, the concepts. For, on the one hand, the spheres of these
are not sufficiently sharply defined, and, on the other hand, they
intersect each other in so many ways that one sphere is in part contained
in many others, and we may pass at will from it to one or another of
these, and from this sphere again to others, as we have already shown. Or,
in other words, the minor term and also the middle can always be
subordinated to different concepts, from which we may choose at will the
major and the middle, and the nature of the conclusion depends on this
choice. Consequently immediate evidence is always much to be preferred to
reasoned truth, and the latter is only to be accepted when the former is
too remote, and not when it is as near or indeed nearer than the latter.
Accordingly we saw above that, as a matter of fact, in the case of logic,
in which the immediate knowledge in each individual case lies nearer to
hand than deduced scientific knowledge, we always conduct our thought
according to our immediate knowledge of the laws of thought, and leave
logic unused.(20)

§ 15. If now with our conviction that perception is the primary source of
all evidence, and that only direct or indirect connection with it is
absolute truth; and further, that the shortest way to this is always the
surest, as every interposition of concepts means exposure to many
deceptions; if, I say, we now turn with this conviction to mathematics, as
it was established as a science by Euclid, and has remained as a whole to
our own day, we cannot help regarding the method it adopts, as strange and
indeed perverted. We ask that every logical proof shall be traced back to
an origin in perception; but mathematics, on the contrary, is at great
pains deliberately to throw away the evidence of perception which is
peculiar to it, and always at hand, that it may substitute for it a
logical demonstration. This must seem to us like the action of a man who
cuts off his legs in order to go on crutches, or like that of the prince
in the “Triumph der Empfindsamkeit” who flees from the beautiful reality
of nature, to delight in a stage scene that imitates it. I must here refer
to what I have said in the sixth chapter of the essay on the principle of
sufficient reason, and take for granted that it is fresh and present in
the memory of the reader; so that I may link my observations on to it
without explaining again the difference between the mere ground of
knowledge of a mathematical truth, which can be given logically, and the
ground of being, which is the immediate connection of the parts of space
and time, known only in perception. It is only insight into the ground of
being that secures satisfaction and thorough knowledge. The mere ground of
knowledge must always remain superficial; it can afford us indeed rational
knowledge that a thing is as it is, but it cannot tell why it is so.
Euclid chose the latter way to the obvious detriment of the science. For
just at the beginning, for example, when he ought to show once for all how
in a triangle the angles and sides reciprocally determine each other, and
stand to each other in the relation of reason and consequent, in
accordance with the form which the principle of sufficient reason has in
pure space, and which there, as in every other sphere, always affords the
necessity that a thing is as it is, because something quite different from
it, is as it is; instead of in this way giving a thorough insight into the
nature of the triangle, he sets up certain disconnected arbitrarily chosen
propositions concerning the triangle, and gives a logical ground of
knowledge of them, through a laborious logical demonstration, based upon
the principle of contradiction. Instead of an exhaustive knowledge of
these space-relations we therefore receive merely certain results of them,
imparted to us at pleasure, and in fact we are very much in the position
of a man to whom the different effects of an ingenious machine are shown,
but from whom its inner connection and construction are withheld. We are
compelled by the principle of contradiction to admit that what Euclid
demonstrates is true, but we do not comprehend why it is so. We have
therefore almost the same uncomfortable feeling that we experience after a
juggling trick, and, in fact, most of Euclid’s demonstrations are
remarkably like such feats. The truth almost always enters by the back
door, for it manifests itself per accidens through some contingent
circumstance. Often a reductio ad absurdum shuts all the doors one after
another, until only one is left through which we are therefore compelled
to enter. Often, as in the proposition of Pythagoras, lines are drawn, we
don’t know why, and it afterwards appears that they were traps which close
unexpectedly and take prisoner the assent of the astonished learner, who
must now admit what remains wholly inconceivable in its inner connection,
so much so, that he may study the whole of Euclid through and through
without gaining a real insight into the laws of space-relations, but
instead of them he only learns by heart certain results which follow from
them. This specially empirical and unscientific knowledge is like that of
the doctor who knows both the disease and the cure for it, but does not
know the connection between them. But all this is the necessary
consequence if we capriciously reject the special kind of proof and
evidence of one species of knowledge, and forcibly introduce in its stead
a kind which is quite foreign to its nature. However, in other respects
the manner in which this has been accomplished by Euclid deserves all the
praise which has been bestowed on him through so many centuries, and which
has been carried so far that his method of treating mathematics has been
set up as the pattern of all scientific exposition. Men tried indeed to
model all the sciences after it, but later they gave up the attempt
without quite knowing why. Yet in our eyes this method of Euclid in
mathematics can appear only as a very brilliant piece of perversity. But
when a great error in life or in science has been intentionally and
methodically carried out with universal applause, it is always possible to
discover its source in the philosophy which prevailed at the time. The
Eleatics first brought out the difference, and indeed often the conflict,
that exists between what is perceived, φαινομενον,(21) and what is
thought, νουμενον, and used it in many ways in their philosophical
epigrams, and also in sophisms. They were followed later by the Megarics,
the Dialecticians, the Sophists, the New-Academy, and the Sceptics; these
drew attention to the illusion, that is to say, to the deception of the
senses, or rather of the understanding which transforms the data of the
senses into perception, and which often causes us to see things to which
the reason unhesitatingly denies reality; for example, a stick broken in
water, and such like. It came to be known that sense-perception was not to
be trusted unconditionally, and it was therefore hastily concluded that
only rational, logical thought could establish truth; although Plato (in
the Parmenides), the Megarics, Pyrrho, and the New-Academy, showed by
examples (in the manner which was afterwards adopted by Sextus Empiricus)
how syllogisms and concepts were also sometimes misleading, and indeed
produced paralogisms and sophisms which arise much more easily and are far
harder to explain than the illusion of sense-perception. However, this
rationalism, which arose in opposition to empiricism, kept the upper hand,
and Euclid constructed the science of mathematics in accordance with it.
He was compelled by necessity to found the axioms upon evidence of
perception (φαινομενον), but all the rest he based upon reasoning
(νουμενον). His method reigned supreme through all the succeeding
centuries, and it could not but do so as long as pure intuition or
perception, a priori, was not distinguished from empirical perception.
Certain passages from the works of Proclus, the commentator of Euclid,
which Kepler translated into Latin in his book, “De Harmonia Mundi,” seem
to show that he fully recognised this distinction. But Proclus did not
attach enough importance to the matter; he merely mentioned it by the way,
so that he remained unnoticed and accomplished nothing. Therefore, not
till two thousand years later will the doctrine of Kant, which is destined
to make such great changes in all the knowledge, thought, and action of
European nations, produce this change in mathematics also. For it is only
after we have learned from this great man that the intuitions or
perceptions of space and time are quite different from empirical
perceptions, entirely independent of any impression of the senses,
conditioning it, not conditioned by it, i.e., are a priori, and
therefore are not exposed to the illusions of sense; only after we have
learned this, I say, can we comprehend that Euclid’s logical method of
treating mathematics is a useless precaution, a crutch for sound legs,
that it is like a wanderer who during the night mistakes a bright, firm
road for water, and carefully avoiding it, toils over the broken ground
beside it, content to keep from point to point along the edge of the
supposed water. Only now can we affirm with certainty that what presents
itself to us as necessary in the perception of a figure, does not come
from the figure on the paper, which is perhaps very defectively drawn, nor
from the abstract concept under which we think it, but immediately from
the form of all knowledge of which we are conscious a priori. This is
always the principle of sufficient reason; here as the form of perception,
i.e., space, it is the principle of the ground of being, the evidence
and validity of which is, however, just as great and as immediate as that
of the principle of the ground of knowing, i.e., logical certainty. Thus
we need not and ought not to leave the peculiar province of mathematics in
order to put our trust only in logical proof, and seek to authenticate
mathematics in a sphere which is quite foreign to it, that of concepts. If
we confine ourselves to the ground peculiar to mathematics, we gain the
great advantage that in it the rational knowledge that something is, is
one with the knowledge why it is so, whereas the method of Euclid
entirely separates these two, and lets us know only the first, not the
second. Aristotle says admirably in the Analyt., post. i. 27: “Ακριβεστερα
δ᾽ επιστημη επιστημης και προτερα, ἡτε του ὁτι και του διοτι ἡ αυτη, αλλα
μη χωρις του ὁτι, της του διοτι” (Subtilior autem et praestantior ea est
scientia, quâ QUOD aliquid sit, et CUR sit una simulque intelligimus
non separatim QUOD, et CUR sit). In physics we are only satisfied
when the knowledge that a thing is as it is is combined with the knowledge
why it is so. To know that the mercury in the Torricellian tube stands
thirty inches high is not really rational knowledge if we do not know that
it is sustained at this height by the counterbalancing weight of the
atmosphere. Shall we then be satisfied in mathematics with the qualitas
occulta of the circle that the segments of any two intersecting chords
always contain equal rectangles? That it is so Euclid certainly
demonstrates in the 35th Prop. of the Third Book; why it is so remains
doubtful. In the same way the proposition of Pythagoras teaches us a
qualitas occulta of the right-angled triangle; the stilted and indeed
fallacious demonstration of Euclid forsakes us at the why, and a simple
figure, which we already know, and which is present to us, gives at a
glance far more insight into the matter, and firm inner conviction of that
necessity, and of the dependence of that quality upon the right angle:—

                              [Illustration]

In the case of unequal catheti also, and indeed generally in the case of
every possible geometrical truth, it is quite possible to obtain such a
conviction based on perception, because these truths were always
discovered by such an empirically known necessity, and their demonstration
was only thought out afterwards in addition. Thus we only require an
analysis of the process of thought in the first discovery of a geometrical
truth in order to know its necessity empirically. It is the analytical
method in general that I wish for the exposition of mathematics, instead
of the synthetical method which Euclid made use of. Yet this would have
very great, though not insuperable, difficulties in the case of
complicated mathematical truths. Here and there in Germany men are
beginning to alter the exposition of mathematics, and to proceed more in
this analytical way. The greatest effort in this direction has been made
by Herr Kosack, teacher of mathematics and physics in the Gymnasium at
Nordhausen, who added a thorough attempt to teach geometry according to my
principles to the programme of the school examination on the 6th of April
1852.

In order to improve the method of mathematics, it is especially necessary
to overcome the prejudice that demonstrated truth has any superiority over
what is known through perception, or that logical truth founded upon the
principle of contradiction has any superiority over metaphysical truth,
which is immediately evident, and to which belongs the pure intuition or
perception of space.

That which is most certain, and yet always inexplicable, is what is
involved in the principle of sufficient reason, for this principle, in its
different aspects, expresses the universal form of all our ideas and
knowledge. All explanation consists of reduction to it, exemplification in
the particular case of the connection of ideas expressed generally through
it. It is thus the principle of all explanation, and therefore it is
neither susceptible of an explanation itself, nor does it stand in need of
it; for every explanation presupposes it, and only obtains meaning through
it. Now, none of its forms are superior to the rest; it is equally certain
and incapable of demonstration as the principle of the ground of being, or
of change, or of action, or of knowing. The relation of reason and
consequent is a necessity in all its forms, and indeed it is, in general,
the source of the concept of necessity, for necessity has no other
meaning. If the reason is given there is no other necessity than that of
the consequent, and there is no reason that does not involve the necessity
of the consequent. Just as surely then as the consequent expressed in the
conclusion follows from the ground of knowledge given in the premises,
does the ground of being in space determine its consequent in space: if I
know through perception the relation of these two, this certainty is just
as great as any logical certainty. But every geometrical proposition is
just as good an expression of such a relation as one of the twelve axioms;
it is a metaphysical truth, and as such, just as certain as the principle
of contradiction itself, which is a metalogical truth, and the common
foundation of all logical demonstration. Whoever denies the necessity,
exhibited for intuition or perception, of the space-relations expressed in
any proposition, may just as well deny the axioms, or that the conclusion
follows from the premises, or, indeed, he may as well deny the principle
of contradiction itself, for all these relations are equally
undemonstrable, immediately evident and known a priori. For any one to
wish to derive the necessity of space-relations, known in intuition or
perception, from the principle of contradiction by means of a logical
demonstration is just the same as for the feudal superior of an estate to
wish to hold it as the vassal of another. Yet this is what Euclid has
done. His axioms only, he is compelled to leave resting upon immediate
evidence; all the geometrical truths which follow are demonstrated
logically, that is to say, from the agreement of the assumptions made in
the proposition with the axioms which are presupposed, or with some
earlier proposition; or from the contradiction between the opposite of the
proposition and the assumptions made in it, or the axioms, or earlier
propositions, or even itself. But the axioms themselves have no more
immediate evidence than any other geometrical problem, but only more
simplicity on account of their smaller content.

When a criminal is examined, a procès-verbal is made of his statement in
order that we may judge of its truth from its consistency. But this is
only a makeshift, and we are not satisfied with it if it is possible to
investigate the truth of each of his answers for itself; especially as he
might lie consistently from the beginning. But Euclid investigated space
according to this first method. He set about it, indeed, under the correct
assumption that nature must everywhere be consistent, and that therefore
it must also be so in space, its fundamental form. Since then the parts of
space stand to each other in a relation of reason and consequent, no
single property of space can be different from what it is without being in
contradiction with all the others. But this is a very troublesome,
unsatisfactory, and roundabout way to follow. It prefers indirect
knowledge to direct, which is just as certain, and it separates the
knowledge that a thing is from the knowledge why it is, to the great
disadvantage of the science; and lastly, it entirely withholds from the
beginner insight into the laws of space, and indeed renders him
unaccustomed to the special investigation of the ground and inner
connection of things, inclining him to be satisfied with a mere historical
knowledge that a thing is as it is. The exercise of acuteness which this
method is unceasingly extolled as affording consists merely in this, that
the pupil practises drawing conclusions, i.e., he practises applying the
principle of contradiction, but specially he exerts his memory to retain
all those data whose agreement is to be tested. Moreover, it is worth
noticing that this method of proof was applied only to geometry and not to
arithmetic. In arithmetic the truth is really allowed to come home to us
through perception alone, which in it consists simply in counting. As the
perception of numbers is in time alone, and therefore cannot be
represented by a sensuous schema like the geometrical figure, the
suspicion that perception is merely empirical, and possibly illusive,
disappeared in arithmetic, and the introduction of the logical method of
proof into geometry was entirely due to this suspicion. As time has only
one dimension, counting is the only arithmetical operation, to which all
others may be reduced; and yet counting is just intuition or perception a
priori, to which there is no hesitation in appealing here, and through
which alone everything else, every sum and every equation, is ultimately
proved. We prove, for example, not that (7 + 9 × 8 - 2)/3 = 42; but we
refer to the pure perception in time, counting thus makes each individual
problem an axiom. Instead of the demonstrations that fill geometry, the
whole content of arithmetic and algebra is thus simply a method of
abbreviating counting. We mentioned above that our immediate perception of
numbers in time extends only to about ten. Beyond this an abstract concept
of the numbers, fixed by a word, must take the place of the perception;
which does not therefore actually occur any longer, but is only indicated
in a thoroughly definite manner. Yet even so, by the important assistance
of the system of figures which enables us to represent all larger numbers
by the same small ones, intuitive or perceptive evidence of every sum is
made possible, even where we make such use of abstraction that not only
the numbers, but indefinite quantities and whole operations are thought
only in the abstract and indicated as so thought, as [sqrt](r^b) so that
we do not perform them, but merely symbolise them.

We might establish truth in geometry also, through pure a priori
perception, with the same right and certainty as in arithmetic. It is in
fact always this necessity, known through perception in accordance with
the principle of sufficient reason of being, which gives to geometry its
principal evidence, and upon which in the consciousness of every one, the
certainty of its propositions rests. The stilted logical demonstration is
always foreign to the matter, and is generally soon forgotten, without
weakening our conviction. It might indeed be dispensed with altogether
without diminishing the evidence of geometry, for this is always quite
independent of such demonstration, which never proves anything we are not
convinced of already, through another kind of knowledge. So far then it is
like a cowardly soldier, who adds a wound to an enemy slain by another,
and then boasts that he slew him himself.(22)

After all this we hope there will be no doubt that the evidence of
mathematics, which has become the pattern and symbol of all evidence,
rests essentially not upon demonstration, but upon immediate perception,
which is thus here, as everywhere else, the ultimate ground and source of
truth. Yet the perception which lies at the basis of mathematics has a
great advantage over all other perception, and therefore over empirical
perception. It is a priori, and therefore independent of experience,
which is always given only in successive parts; therefore everything is
equally near to it, and we can start either from the reason or from the
consequent, as we please. Now this makes it absolutely reliable, for in it
the consequent is known from the reason, and this is the only kind of
knowledge that has necessity; for example, the equality of the sides is
known as established by the equality of the angles. All empirical
perception, on the other hand, and the greater part of experience,
proceeds conversely from the consequent to the reason, and this kind of
knowledge is not infallible, for necessity only attaches to the consequent
on account of the reason being given, and no necessity attaches to the
knowledge of the reason from the consequent, for the same consequent may
follow from different reasons. The latter kind of knowledge is simply
induction, i.e., from many consequents which point to one reason, the
reason is accepted as certain; but as the cases can never be all before
us, the truth here is not unconditionally certain. But all knowledge
through sense-perception, and the great bulk of experience, has only this
kind of truth. The affection of one of the senses induces the
understanding to infer a cause of the effect, but, as a conclusion from
the consequent to the reason is never certain, illusion, which is
deception of the senses, is possible, and indeed often occurs, as was
pointed out above. Only when several of the senses, or it may be all the
five, receive impressions which point to the same cause, the possibility
of illusion is reduced to a minimum; but yet it still exists, for there
are cases, for example, the case of counterfeit money, in which all the
senses are deceived. All empirical knowledge, and consequently the whole
of natural science, is in the same position, except only the pure, or as
Kant calls it, metaphysical part of it. Here also the causes are known
from the effects, consequently all natural philosophy rests upon
hypotheses, which are often false, and must then gradually give place to
more correct ones. Only in the case of purposely arranged experiments,
knowledge proceeds from the cause to the effect, that is, it follows the
method that affords certainty; but these experiments themselves are
undertaken in consequence of hypotheses. Therefore, no branch of natural
science, such as physics, or astronomy, or physiology could be discovered
all at once, as was the case with mathematics and logic, but required and
requires the collected and compared experiences of many centuries. In the
first place, repeated confirmation in experience brings the induction,
upon which the hypothesis rests, so near completeness that in practice it
takes the place of certainty, and is regarded as diminishing the value of
the hypothesis, its source, just as little as the incommensurability of
straight and curved lines diminishes the value of the application of
geometry, or that perfect exactness of the logarithm, which is not
attainable, diminishes the value of arithmetic. For as the logarithm, or
the squaring of the circle, approaches infinitely near to correctness
through infinite fractions, so, through manifold experience, the
induction, i.e., the knowledge of the cause from the effects,
approaches, not infinitely indeed, but yet so near mathematical evidence,
i.e., knowledge of the effects from the cause, that the possibility of
mistake is small enough to be neglected, but yet the possibility exists;
for example, a conclusion from an indefinite number of cases to all cases,
i.e., to the unknown ground on which all depend, is an induction. What
conclusion of this kind seems more certain than that all men have the
heart on the left side? Yet there are extremely rare and quite isolated
exceptions of men who have the heart upon the right side. Sense-perception
and empirical science have, therefore, the same kind of evidence. The
advantage which mathematics, pure natural science, and logic have over
them, as a priori knowledge, rests merely upon this, that the formal
element in knowledge upon which all that is a priori is based, is given
as a whole and at once, and therefore in it we can always proceed from the
cause to the effect, while in the former kind of knowledge we are
generally obliged to proceed from the effect to the cause. In other
respects, the law of causality, or the principle of sufficient reason of
change, which guides empirical knowledge, is in itself just as certain as
the other forms of the principle of sufficient reason which are followed
by the a priori sciences referred to above. Logical demonstrations from
concepts or syllogisms have the advantage of proceeding from the reason to
the consequent, just as much as knowledge through perception a priori,
and therefore in themselves, i.e., according to their form, they are
infallible. This has greatly assisted to bring demonstration in general
into such esteem. But this infallibility is merely relative; the
demonstration merely subsumes under the first principles of the science,
and it is these which contain the whole material truth of science, and
they must not themselves be demonstrated, but must be founded on
perception. In the few a priori sciences we have named above, this
perception is pure, but everywhere else it is empirical, and is only
raised to universality through induction. If, then, in the empirical
sciences also, the particular is proved from the general, yet the general,
on the other hand, has received its truth from the particular; it is only
a store of collected material, not a self-constituted foundation.

So much for the foundation of truth. Of the source and possibility of
error many explanations have been tried since Plato’s metaphorical
solution of the dove-cot where the wrong pigeons are caught, &c.
(Theætetus, p. 167, et seq.) Kant’s vague, indefinite explanation of the
source of error by means of the diagram of diagonal motion, will be found
in the “Critique of Pure Reason,” p. 294 of the first edition, and p. 350
of the fifth. As truth is the relation of a judgment to its ground of
knowledge, it is always a problem how the person judging can believe that
he has such a ground of knowledge and yet not have it; that is to say, how
error, the deception of reason, is possible. I find this possibility quite
analogous to that of illusion, or the deception of the understanding,
which has been explained above. My opinion is (and this is what gives this
explanation its proper place here) that every error is an inference from
the consequent to the reason, which indeed is valid when we know that the
consequent has that reason and can have no other; but otherwise is not
valid. The person who falls into error, either attributes to a consequent
a reason which it cannot have, in which case he shows actual deficiency of
understanding, i.e., deficiency in the capacity for immediate knowledge
of the connection between the cause and the effect, or, as more frequently
happens, he attributes to the effect a cause which is possible, but he
adds to the major proposition of the syllogism, in which he infers the
cause from the effect, that this effect always results only from this
cause. Now he could only be assured of this by a complete induction,
which, however, he assumes without having made it. This “always” is
therefore too wide a concept, and instead of it he ought to have used
“sometimes” or “generally.” The conclusion would then be problematical,
and therefore not erroneous. That the man who errs should proceed in this
way is due either to haste, or to insufficient knowledge of what is
possible, on account of which he does not know the necessity of the
induction that ought to be made. Error then is quite analogous to
illusion. Both are inferences from the effect to the cause; the illusion
brought about always in accordance with the law of causality, and by the
understanding alone, thus directly, in perception itself; the error in
accordance with all the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, and
by the reason, thus in thought itself; yet most commonly in accordance
with the law of causality, as will appear from the three following
examples, which may be taken as types or representatives of the three
kinds of error. (1.) The illusion of the senses (deception of the
understanding) induces error (deception of the reason); for example, if
one mistakes a painting for an alto-relief, and actually takes it for
such; the error results from a conclusion from the following major
premise: “If dark grey passes regularly through all shades to white; the
cause is always the light, which strikes differently upon projections
and depressions, ergo—.” (2.) “If there is no money in my safe, the
cause is always that my servant has got a key for it: ergo—.” (3.) “If
a ray of sunlight, broken through a prism, i.e., bent up or down,
appears as a coloured band instead of round and white as before, the cause
must always be that light consists of homogeneous rays, differently
coloured and refrangible to different degrees, which, when forced asunder
on account of the difference of their refrangibility, give an elongated
and variously-coloured spectrum: ergo—bibamus!”—It must be possible to
trace every error to such a conclusion, drawn from a major premise which
is often only falsely generalised, hypothetical, and founded on the
assumption that some particular cause is that of a certain effect. Only
certain mistakes in counting are to be excepted, and they are not really
errors, but merely mistakes. The operation prescribed by the concepts of
the numbers has not been carried out in pure intuition or perception, in
counting, but some other operation instead of it.

As regards the content of the sciences generally, it is, in fact, always
the relation of the phenomena of the world to each other, according to the
principle of sufficient reason, under the guidance of the why, which has
validity and meaning only through this principle. Explanation is the
establishment of this relation. Therefore explanation can never go further
than to show two ideas standing to each other in the relation peculiar to
that form of the principle of sufficient reason which reigns in the class
to which they belong. If this is done we cannot further be asked the
question, why: for the relation proved is that one which absolutely
cannot be imagined as other than it is, i.e., it is the form of all
knowledge. Therefore we do not ask why 2 + 2 = 4; or why the equality of
the angles of a triangle determines the equality of the sides; or why its
effect follows any given cause; or why the truth of the conclusion is
evident from the truth of the premises. Every explanation which does not
ultimately lead to a relation of which no “why” can further be demanded,
stops at an accepted qualitas occulta; but this is the character of
every original force of nature. Every explanation in natural science must
ultimately end with such a qualitas occulta, and thus with complete
obscurity. It must leave the inner nature of a stone just as much
unexplained as that of a human being; it can give as little account of the
weight, the cohesion, the chemical qualities, &c., of the former, as of
the knowing and acting of the latter. Thus, for example, weight is a
qualitas occulta, for it can be thought away, and does not proceed as a
necessity from the form of knowledge; which, on the contrary, is not the
case with the law of inertia, for it follows from the law of causality,
and is therefore sufficiently explained if it is referred to that law.
There are two things which are altogether inexplicable,—that is to say, do
not ultimately lead to the relation which the principle of sufficient
reason expresses. These are, first, the principle of sufficient reason
itself in all its four forms, because it is the principle of all
explanation, which has meaning only in relation to it; secondly, that to
which this principle does not extend, but which is the original source of
all phenomena; the thing-in-itself, the knowledge of which is not subject
to the principle of sufficient reason. We must be content for the present
not to understand this thing-in-itself, for it can only be made
intelligible by means of the following book, in which we shall resume this
consideration of the possible achievements of the sciences. But at the
point at which natural science, and indeed every science, leaves things,
because not only its explanation of them, but even the principle of this
explanation, the principle of sufficient reason, does not extend beyond
this point; there philosophy takes them up and treats them after its own
method, which is quite distinct from the method of science. In my essay on
the principle of sufficient reason, § 51, I have shown how in the
different sciences the chief guiding clue is one or other form of that
principle; and, in fact, perhaps the most appropriate classification of
the sciences might be based upon this circumstance. Every explanation
arrived at by the help of this clue is, as we have said, merely relative;
it explains things in relation to each other, but something which indeed
is presupposed is always left unexplained. In mathematics, for example,
this is space and time; in mechanics, physics, and chemistry it is matter,
qualities, original forces and laws of nature; in botany and zoology it is
the difference of species, and life itself; in history it is the human
race with all its properties of thought and will: in all it is that form
of the principle of sufficient reason which is respectively applicable. It
is peculiar to philosophy that it presupposes nothing as known, but
treats everything as equally external and a problem; not merely the
relations of phenomena, but also the phenomena themselves, and even the
principle of sufficient reason to which the other sciences are content to
refer everything. In philosophy nothing would be gained by such a
reference, as one member of the series is just as external to it as
another; and, moreover, that kind of connection is just as much a problem
for philosophy as what is joined together by it, and the latter again is
just as much a problem after its combination has been explained as before
it. For, as we have said, just what the sciences presuppose and lay down
as the basis and the limits of their explanation, is precisely and
peculiarly the problem of philosophy, which may therefore be said to begin
where science ends. It cannot be founded upon demonstrations, for they
lead from known principles to unknown, but everything is equally unknown
and external to philosophy. There can be no principle in consequence of
which the world with all its phenomena first came into existence, and
therefore it is not possible to construct, as Spinoza wished, a philosophy
which demonstrates ex firmis principiis. Philosophy is the most general
rational knowledge, the first principles of which cannot therefore be
derived from another principle still more general. The principle of
contradiction establishes merely the agreement of concepts, but does not
itself produce concepts. The principle of sufficient reason explains the
connections of phenomena, but not the phenomena themselves; therefore
philosophy cannot proceed upon these principles to seek a causa
efficiens or a causa finalis of the whole world. My philosophy, at
least, does not by any means seek to know whence or wherefore the
world exists, but merely what the world is. But the why is here
subordinated to the what, for it already belongs to the world, as it
arises and has meaning and validity only through the form of its
phenomena, the principle of sufficient reason. We might indeed say that
every one knows what the world is without help, for he is himself that
subject of knowledge of which the world is the idea; and so far this would
be true. But that knowledge is empirical, is in the concrete; the task of
philosophy is to reproduce this in the abstract to raise to permanent
rational knowledge the successive changing perceptions, and in general,
all that is contained under the wide concept of feeling and merely
negatively defined as not abstract, distinct, rational knowledge. It must
therefore consist of a statement in the abstract, of the nature of the
whole world, of the whole, and of all the parts. In order then that it may
not lose itself in the endless multitude of particular judgments, it must
make use of abstraction and think everything individual in the universal,
and its differences also in the universal. It must therefore partly
separate and partly unite, in order to present to rational knowledge the
whole manifold of the world generally, according to its nature,
comprehended in a few abstract concepts. Through these concepts, in which
it fixes the nature of the world, the whole individual must be known as
well as the universal, the knowledge of both therefore must be bound
together to the minutest point. Therefore the capacity for philosophy
consists just in that in which Plato placed it, the knowledge of the one
in the many, and the many in the one. Philosophy will therefore be a
sum-total of general judgments, whose ground of knowledge is immediately
the world itself in its entirety, without excepting anything; thus all
that is to be found in human consciousness; it will be a complete
recapitulation, as it were, a reflection, of the world in abstract
concepts, which is only possible by the union of the essentially
identical in one concept and the relegation of the different to another.
This task was already prescribed to philosophy by Bacon of Verulam when he
said: ea demum vera est philosophia, quae mundi ipsius voces fidelissime
reddit, et veluti dictante mundo conscripta est, et nihil aliud est, quam
ejusdem SIMULACRUM ET REFLECTIO, neque addit quidquam de proprio, sed
tantum iterat et resonat (De Augm. Scient., L. 2, c. 13). But we take
this in a wider sense than Bacon could then conceive.

The agreement which all the sides and parts of the world have with each
other, just because they belong to a whole, must also be found in this
abstract copy of it. Therefore the judgments in this sum-total could to a
certain extent be deduced from each other, and indeed always reciprocally
so deduced. Yet to make the first judgment possible, they must all be
present, and thus implied as prior to it in the knowledge of the world in
the concrete, especially as all direct proof is more certain than indirect
proof; their harmony with each other by virtue of which they come together
into the unity of one thought, and which arises from the harmony and
unity of the world of perception itself, which is their common ground of
knowledge, is not therefore to be made use of to establish them, as that
which is prior to them, but is only added as a confirmation of their
truth. This problem itself can only become quite clear in being
solved.(23)

§ 16. After this full consideration of reason as a special faculty of
knowledge belonging to man alone, and the results and phenomena peculiar
to human nature brought about by it, it still remains for me to speak of
reason, so far as it is the guide of human action, and in this respect may
be called practical. But what there is to say upon this point has found
its place elsewhere in the appendix to this work, where I controvert the
existence of the so-called practical reason of Kant, which he (certainly
very conveniently) explained as the immediate source of virtue, and as the
seat of an absolute (i.e., fallen from heaven) imperative. The detailed
and thorough refutation of this Kantian principle of morality I have given
later in the “Fundamental Problems of Ethics.” There remains, therefore,
but little for me to say here about the actual influence of reason, in the
true sense of the word, upon action. At the commencement of our treatment
of reason we remarked, in general terms, how much the action and behaviour
of men differs from that of brutes, and that this difference is to be
regarded as entirely due to the presence of abstract concepts in
consciousness. The influence of these upon our whole existence is so
penetrating and significant that, on account of them, we are related to
the lower animals very much as those animals that see are related to those
that have no eyes (certain larvae, worms, and zoophytes). Animals without
eyes know only by touch what is immediately present to them in space, what
comes into contact with them; those which see, on the contrary, know a
wide circle of near and distant objects. In the same way the absence of
reason confines the lower animals to the ideas of perception, i.e., the
real objects which are immediately present to them in time; we, on the
contrary, on account of knowledge in the abstract, comprehend not only the
narrow actual present, but also the whole past and future, and the wide
sphere of the possible; we view life freely on all its sides, and go far
beyond the present and the actual. Thus what the eye is in space and for
sensuous knowledge, reason is, to a certain extent, in time and for inner
knowledge. But as the visibility of objects has its worth and meaning only
in the fact that it informs us of their tangibility, so the whole worth of
abstract knowledge always consists in its relation to what is perceived.
Therefore men naturally attach far more worth to immediate and perceived
knowledge than to abstract concepts, to that which is merely thought; they
place empirical knowledge before logical. But this is not the opinion of
men who live more in words than in deeds, who have seen more on paper and
in books than in actual life, and who in their greatest degeneracy become
pedants and lovers of the mere letter. Thus only is it conceivable that
Leibnitz and Wolf and all their successors could go so far astray as to
explain knowledge of perception, after the example of Duns Scotus, as
merely confused abstract knowledge! To the honour of Spinoza, I must
mention that his truer sense led him, on the contrary, to explain all
general concepts as having arisen from the confusion of that which was
known in perception (Eth. II., prop. 40, Schol. 1). It is also a result of
perverted opinion that in mathematics the evidence proper to it was
rejected, and logical evidence alone accepted; that everything in general
which was not abstract knowledge was comprehended under the wide name of
feeling, and consequently was little valued; and lastly that the Kantian
ethics regarded the good will which immediately asserts itself upon
knowledge of the circumstances, and guides to right and good action as
mere feeling and emotion, and consequently as worthless and without merit,
and would only recognise actions which proceed from abstract maxims as
having moral worth.

The many-sided view of life as a whole which man, as distinguished from
the lower animals, possesses through reason, may be compared to a
geometrical, colourless, abstract, reduced plan of his actual life. He,
therefore, stands to the lower animals as the navigator who, by means of
chart, compass, and quadrant, knows accurately his course and his position
at any time upon the sea, stands to the uneducated sailors who see only
the waves and the heavens. Thus it is worth noticing, and indeed
wonderful, how, besides his life in the concrete, man always lives another
life in the abstract. In the former he is given as a prey to all the
storms of actual life, and to the influence of the present; he must
struggle, suffer, and die like the brute. But his life in the abstract, as
it lies before his rational consciousness, is the still reflection of the
former, and of the world in which he lives; it is just that reduced chart
or plan to which we have referred. Here in the sphere of quiet
deliberation, what completely possessed him and moved him intensely
before, appears to him cold, colourless, and for the moment external to
him; he is merely the spectator, the observer. In respect of this
withdrawal into reflection he may be compared to an actor who has played
his part in one scene, and who takes his place among the audience till it
is time for him to go upon the stage again, and quietly looks on at
whatever may happen, even though it be the preparation for his own death
(in the piece), but afterwards he again goes on the stage and acts and
suffers as he must. From this double life proceeds that quietness peculiar
to human beings, so very different from the thoughtlessness of the brutes,
and with which, in accordance with previous reflection, or a formed
determination, or a recognised necessity, a man suffers or accomplishes in
cold blood, what is of the utmost and often terrible importance to him;
suicide, execution, the duel, enterprises of every kind fraught with
danger to life, and, in general, things against which his whole animal
nature rebels. Under such circumstances we see to what an extent reason
has mastered the animal nature, and we say to the strong: σιδηρειον νυ τοι
ἡτορ! (ferreum certe tibi cor), Il. 24, 521. Here we can say truly that
reason manifests itself practically, and thus wherever action is guided by
reason, where the motives are abstract concepts, wherever we are not
determined by particular ideas of perception, nor by the impression of the
moment which guides the brutes, there practical reason shows itself. But
I have fully explained in the Appendix, and illustrated by examples, that
this is entirely different from and unrelated to the ethical worth of
actions; that rational action and virtuous action are two entirely
different things; that reason may just as well find itself in connection
with great evil as with great good, and by its assistance may give great
power to the one as well as to the other; that it is equally ready and
valuable for the methodical and consistent carrying out of the noble and
of the bad intention, of the wise as of the foolish maxim; which all
results from the constitution of its nature, which is feminine, receptive,
retentive, and not spontaneous; all this I have shown in detail in the
Appendix, and illustrated by examples. What is said there would have been
placed here, but on account of my polemic against Kant’s pretended
practical reason I have been obliged to relegate it to the Appendix, to
which I therefore refer.

The ideal explained in the Stoical philosophy is the most complete
development of practical reason in the true and genuine sense of the
word; it is the highest summit to which man can attain by the mere use of
his reason, and in it his difference from the brutes shows itself most
distinctly. For the ethics of Stoicism are originally and essentially, not
a doctrine of virtue, but merely a guide to a rational life, the end and
aim of which is happiness through peace of mind. Virtuous conduct appears
in it as it were merely by accident, as the means, not as the end.
Therefore the ethical theory of Stoicism is in its whole nature and point
of view fundamentally different from the ethical systems which lay stress
directly upon virtue, such as the doctrines of the Vedas, of Plato, of
Christianity, and of Kant. The aim of Stoical ethics is happiness: τελος
το ευδαι μονειν (virtutes omnes finem habere beatitudinem) it is called
in the account of the Stoa by Stobæus (Ecl., L. ii. c. 7, p. 114, and also
p. 138). Yet the ethics of Stoicism teach that happiness can only be
attained with certainty through inward peace and quietness of spirit
(αταραξια), and that this again can only be reached through virtue; this
is the whole meaning of the saying that virtue is the highest good. But if
indeed by degrees the end is lost sight of in the means, and virtue is
inculcated in a way which discloses an interest entirely different from
that of one’s own happiness, for it contradicts this too distinctly; this
is just one of those inconsistencies by means of which, in every system,
the immediately known, or, as it is called, felt truth leads us back to
the right way in defiance of syllogistic reasoning; as, for example, we
see clearly in the ethical teaching of Spinoza, which deduces a pure
doctrine of virtue from the egoistical suum utile quærere by means of
palpable sophisms. According to this, as I conceive the spirit of the
Stoical ethics, their source lies in the question whether the great
prerogative of man, reason, which, by means of planned action and its
results, relieves life and its burdens so much, might not also be capable
of freeing him at once, directly, i.e., through mere knowledge,
completely, or nearly so, of the sorrows and miseries of every kind of
which his life is full. They held that it was not in keeping with the
prerogative of reason that the nature given with it, which by means of it
comprehends and contemplates an infinity of things and circumstances,
should yet, through the present, and the accidents that can be contained
in the few years of a life that is short, fleeting, and uncertain, be
exposed to such intense pain, to such great anxiety and suffering, as
arise from the tempestuous strain of the desires and the antipathies; and
they believed that the due application of reason must raise men above
them, and can make them invulnerable. Therefore Antisthenes says: Δει
κτασθαι νουν, η βροχον (aut mentem parandam, aut laqueum. Plut. de
stoic. repugn., c. 14), i.e., life is so full of troubles and vexations,
that one must either rise above it by means of corrected thoughts, or
leave it. It was seen that want and suffering did not directly and of
necessity spring from not having, but from desiring to have and not
having; that therefore this desire to have is the necessary condition
under which alone it becomes a privation not to have and begets pain. Ου
πενια λυπην εργαζεται, αλλα επιθυμια (non paupertas dolorem efficit, sed
cupiditas), Epict., fragm. 25. Men learned also from experience that it
is only the hope of what is claimed that begets and nourishes the wish;
therefore neither the many unavoidable evils which are common to all, nor
unattainable blessings, disquiet or trouble us, but only the trifling more
or less of those things which we can avoid or attain; indeed, not only
what is absolutely unavoidable or unattainable, but also what is merely
relatively so, leaves us quite undisturbed; therefore the ills that have
once become joined to our individuality, or the good things that must of
necessity always be denied us, are treated with indifference, in
accordance with the peculiarity of human nature that every wish soon dies
and can no more beget pain if it is not nourished by hope. It followed
from all this that happiness always depends upon the proportion between
our claims and what we receive. It is all one whether the quantities thus
related be great or small, and the proportion can be established just as
well by diminishing the amount of the first as by increasing the amount of
the second; and in the same way it also follows that all suffering
proceeds from the want of proportion between what we demand and expect and
what we get. Now this want of proportion obviously lies only in knowledge,
and it could be entirely abolished through fuller insight.(24) Therefore
Chrysippus says: δει ζῃν κατ᾽ εμπειριαν των φυσει συμβαινοντων (Stob.
Ecl., L. ii. c. 7, p. 134), that is, one ought to live with a due
knowledge of the transitory nature of the things of the world. For as
often as a man loses self-command, or is struck down by a misfortune, or
grows angry, or becomes faint-hearted, he shows that he finds things
different from what he expected, consequently that he was caught in error,
and did not know the world and life, did not know that the will of the
individual is crossed at every step by the chance of inanimate nature and
the antagonism of aims and the wickedness of other individuals: he has
therefore either not made use of his reason in order to arrive at a
general knowledge of this characteristic of life, or he lacks judgment, in
that he does not recognise in the particular what he knows in general, and
is therefore surprised by it and loses his self-command.(25) Thus also
every keen pleasure is an error and an illusion, for no attained wish can
give lasting satisfaction; and, moreover, every possession and every
happiness is but lent by chance for an uncertain time, and may therefore
be demanded back the next hour. All pain rests on the passing away of such
an illusion; thus both arise from defective knowledge; the wise man
therefore holds himself equally aloof from joy and sorrow, and no event
disturbs his αταραξια.

In accordance with this spirit and aim of the Stoa, Epictetus began and
ended with the doctrine as the kernel of his philosophy, that we should
consider well and distinguish what depends upon us and what does not, and
therefore entirely avoid counting upon the latter, whereby we shall
certainly remain free from all pain, sorrow, and anxiety. But that which
alone is dependent upon us is the will; and here a transition gradually
takes place to a doctrine of virtue, for it is observed that as the outer
world, which is independent of us, determines good and bad fortune, so
inner contentment with ourselves, or the absence of it, proceeds from the
will. But it was then asked whether we ought to apply the words bonum
and malum to the two former or to the two latter? This was indeed
arbitrary and a matter of choice, and did not make any real difference,
but yet the Stoics disputed everlastingly with the Peripatetics and
Epicureans about it, and amused themselves with the inadmissible
comparison of two entirely incommensurable quantities, and the
antithetical, paradoxical judgments which proceeded from them, and which
they flung at each other. The Paradoxa of Cicero afford us an
interesting collection of these from the Stoical side.

Zeno, the founder, seems originally to have followed a somewhat different
path. The starting-point with him was that for the attainment of the
highest good, i.e., blessedness and spiritual peace, one must live in
harmony with oneself (ὁμολογουμενους ξῃν; δ᾽ εστι καθ᾽ ἑνα λογον και
συμφωνον ξῃν.—Consonanter vivere: hoc est secundum unam rationem et
concordem sibi vivere. Stob. Ecl. eth. L. ii., c. 7, p. 132. Also: Αρετην
διαθεσιν ειναι ψυχης συμφωνον ἑαυτῃ περι ὁλον τον βιον. Virtutem esse
animi affectiomem secum per totam vitam consentientem, ibid., p. 104.)
Now this was only possible for a man if he determined himself entirely
rationally, according to concepts, not according to changing impressions
and moods; since, however, only the maxims of our conduct, not the
consequences nor the outward circumstances, are in our power, in order to
be always consistent we must set before us as our aim only the maxims and
not the consequences and circumstances, and thus again a doctrine of
virtue is introduced.

But the ethical principle of Zeno—to live in harmony with oneself—appeared
even to his immediate successors to be too formal and empty. They
therefore gave it material content by the addition—“to live in harmony
with nature” (ὁμολογουμενως τῃ φυσει ζῃν), which, as Stobæus mentions in
another place, was first added by Kleanthes, and extended the matter very
much on account of the wide sphere of the concept and the vagueness of the
expression. For Kleanthes meant the whole of nature in general, while
Chrysippus meant human nature in particular (Diog. Laert., 7, 89). It
followed that what alone was adapted to the latter was virtue, just as the
satisfaction of animal desires was adapted to animal natures; and thus
ethics had again to be forcibly united to a doctrine of virtue, and in
some way or other established through physics. For the Stoics always aimed
at unity of principle, as for them God and the world were not dissevered.

The ethical system of Stoicism, regarded as a whole, is in fact a very
valuable and estimable attempt to use the great prerogative of man,
reason, for an important and salutary end; to raise him above the
suffering and pain to which all life is exposed, by means of a maxim—


    “Qua ratione queas traducere leniter œvum:
    Ne te semper inops agitet vexetque cupido,
    Ne pavor et rerum mediocriter utilium spes,”


and thus to make him partake, in the highest degree, of the dignity which
belongs to him as a rational being, as distinguished from the brutes; a
dignity of which, in this sense at any rate, we can speak, though not in
any other. It is a consequence of my view of the ethical system of
Stoicism that it must be explained at the part of my work at which I
consider what reason is and what it can do. But although it may to a
certain extent be possible to attain that end through the application of
reason, and through a purely rational system of ethics, and although
experience shows that the happiest men are those purely rational
characters commonly called practical philosophers,—and rightly so, because
just as the true, that is, the theoretical philosopher carries life into
the concept, they carry the concept into life,—yet it is far from the case
that perfection can be attained in this way, and that the reason, rightly
used, can really free us from the burden and sorrow of life, and lead us
to happiness. Rather, there lies an absolute contradiction in wishing to
live without suffering, and this contradiction is also implied in the
commonly used expression, “blessed life.” This will become perfectly clear
to whoever comprehends the whole of the following exposition. In this
purely rational system of ethics the contradiction reveals itself thus,
the Stoic is obliged in his doctrine of the way to the blessed life (for
that is what his ethical system always remains) to insert a recommendation
of suicide (as among the magnificent ornaments and apparel of Eastern
despots there is always a costly vial of poison) for the case in which the
sufferings of the body, which cannot be philosophised away by any
principles or syllogistic reasonings, are paramount and incurable; thus
its one aim, blessedness, is rendered vain, and nothing remains as a mode
of escape from suffering except death; in such a case then death must be
voluntarily accepted, just as we would take any other medicine. Here then
a marked antagonism is brought out between the ethical system of Stoicism
and all those systems referred to above which make virtue in itself
directly, and accompanied by the most grievous sorrows, their aim, and
will not allow a man to end his life in order to escape from suffering.
Not one of them, however, was able to give the true reason for the
rejection of suicide, but they laboriously collected illusory explanations
from all sides: the true reason will appear in the Fourth Book in the
course of the development of our system. But the antagonism referred to
reveals and establishes the essential difference in fundamental principle
between Stoicism, which is just a special form of endæmonism, and those
doctrines we have mentioned, although both are often at one in their
results, and are apparently related. And the inner contradiction referred
to above, with which the ethical system of Stoicism is affected even in
its fundamental thought, shows itself further in the circumstance that its
ideal, the Stoic philosopher, as the system itself represents him, could
never obtain life or inner poetic truth, but remains a wooden, stiff
lay-figure of which nothing can be made. He cannot himself make use of his
wisdom, and his perfect peace, contentment, and blessedness directly
contradict the nature of man, and preclude us from forming any concrete
idea of him. When compared with him, how entirely different appear the
overcomers of the world, and voluntary hermits that Indian philosophy
presents to us, and has actually produced; or indeed, the holy man of
Christianity, that excellent form full of deep life, of the greatest
poetic truth, and the highest significance, which stands before us in
perfect virtue, holiness, and sublimity, yet in a state of supreme
suffering.(26)
